                     Journal of Human Kinetics volume 90/2024, 183–214   DOI: 10.5114/jhk/182888 
183 
                       Section III – Sports and Physical Activity 
 
 
 
1 NAR—Nucleus of High Performance in Sport, São Paulo, Brazil. 
2 Department of Human Movement Sciences, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. 
3 Department of Sport, Health, and Exercise Science, University of South Wales, Pontypridd, Wales, United Kingdom. 
4 Faculty of Physical Activity and Sports, University of Flores, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
5 Institute of Sport Sciences, The Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education in Katowice, Katowice, Poland. 
6 Department of Exercise and Sport Performance, The Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education in Katowice, Katowice, 
Poland. 
7 UCAM Research Center for High Performance Sport, UCAM Universidad Católica de Murcia, Murcia, Spain. 
8 Facultad de Deporte, UCAM Universidad Católica de Murcia, Murcia, Spain. 
9 London Sport Institute, Middlesex University, London, United Kingdom. 
* Correspondence: irineu.loturco@terra.com.br 
Accepted for publishing in the Journal of Human Kinetics vol. 90/2024 in January 2024.  
 Resistance Training Practices of Brazilian Olympic Sprint  
and Jump Coaches: Toward a Deeper Understanding  
of Their Choices and Insights (Part III) 
by 
Irineu Loturco 1,2,3,*, Santiago Zabaloy 4, Lucas A. Pereira 1, Túlio B. M. A. Moura 1, 
Valter P. Mercer 1, Victor Fernandes 1, Adam Zając 5, Aleksander Matusinski 6, 
Tomás T. Freitas 1,7,8, Chris Bishop 9 
In the final part of this three-article collection on the training strategies of Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches, we provide a detailed description of the resistance training methods and exercises most commonly employed by 
these speed experts. Always with the objective of maximizing the sprint and jump capabilities of their athletes, these 
experienced coaches primarily utilize variable, eccentric, concentric, machine-based, isometric, complex, and isoinertial 
resistance training methods in their daily practices. Squats (in their different forms), Olympic weightlifting, ballistics, 
hip thrusts, lunges, calf raises, core exercises, leg curls, stiff-leg deadlifts, and leg extension are the most commonly 
prescribed exercises in their training programs, during both the preparatory and competitive periods. Therefore, the 
current manuscript comprehensively describes and examines these methods, with the additional aim of extrapolating their 
application to other sports, especially those where sprint speed is a key performance factor.  
Keywords: athletic performance; track and field; sprint speed; muscle strength; strength training; athletes 
 
Introduction 
The improvement of strength and power 
qualities stands as a fundamental priority across a 
wide variety of sports (Suchomel et al., 2016, 2018). 
Indeed, it is well-established that muscle strength 
and power provide a solid foundation for the 
proper development of various other physical 
abilities, including linear sprinting and change of 
direction (COD) speed, jumping, and even 
endurance-related 
capacities 
(e.g., 
running 
economy) (Suchomel et al., 2016, 2018). Resistance 
training, in all its different forms and types (e.g., 
eccentric versus concentric; ballistic versus non-
ballistic), is, unquestionably, the most popular and 
effective method to enhance strength and power 
adaptations in athletes from multiple sports, levels, 
and age-categories (Cormier et al., 2021; Dowse et 
al., 2020; Haff and Nimphius, 2012; Suchomel et al., 
2021). Therefore, it is expected that track and field 
coaches will consider resistance training methods, 
and their broad range of strategies (e.g., complex 
training, ballistic exercises), one of the more 
relevant and crucial parts of their training planning 
and programs (Deweese et al., 2015; Healy et al.,  

184  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
2021; Suchomel et al., 2018). This is particularly 
evident in sprint and jump events, athletic 
disciplines in which athletes are distinguished by 
their exceptional levels of relative strength and 
power (Loturco et al., 2021a, 2021c; Young et al., 
1995).  
 
Previous studies involving sprint and 
jump coaches have already addressed these issues, 
elucidating the main goals and primary objectives 
for implementing and using diverse strength-
power training regimens and exercises, while also 
outlining the purposes and objectives behind this 
rationale. In a survey on the practices of sprinting 
coaches, Healy et al. (2021) revealed that sprint 
coaches selected resistance exercises based on three 
principal reasons: (1) performance adaptations; (2) 
practicality; and 3) targeting muscles/muscle 
groups 
that 
mimic 
sprinting 
technique. 
Approximately 71% of these coaches (41 sprint 
coaches working in Ireland with coaching 
experience of ~8.4 ± 6.4 years, including 43.9, 36.6, 
and 19.5% 
of 
coaches 
who 
worked 
with 
international, national, and regional level athletes, 
respectively) reported that, in their views, 
resistance training was “very important” for 
sprinters. In a practical study regarding “Strength 
and Conditioning Considerations for the 100-m 
Sprinter”, Cissik (2010) reinforces these points, as 
well as highlights some important questions that 
should be taken into account when designing 
resistance training programs for elite sprinters: the 
short-time duration of the race (~10 s); the 
explosive nature of the event; the necessity to 
constantly apply force against the ground; and, 
finally, the unilateral characteristic of the sprint 
(i.e., only one leg is in contact with the ground at a 
time).  
 
In summary, and similarly to what occurs 
in multiple individual and team-sports, for sprint 
and jump coaches, unquestionably, similarity 
(with sport-specific techniques) and effectiveness 
are the main reasons for selecting and applying a 
range of strength-power exercises and resistance 
training methods (Healy et al., 2021; Loturco et al., 
2023a, 2023b). These aims are also common among 
Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump coaches 
(Loturco et al., 2023b), who have mentioned that 
resistance training schemes are frequently utilized 
to increase neuromuscular readiness during the 
competitive period and to reduce perceptual 
fatigue, potentially minimizing the risk of injuries  
 
 
across successive competitions. Within a series of 
essential strategies reported by these coaches, we 
can highlight, for example, variable resistance 
training (VRT) as well as squats and their 
variations as the most frequently used methods 
and exercises, respectively (Loturco et al., 2023b) 
(Tables 1 and 2 show the complete list of methods 
and exercises most commonly used by these 
coaches, along with their relative frequency of 
utilization). In the current article—the final of a 
three-article special collection on Olympic sprint 
and jump coaching practices—we will list, 
describe, and critically analyze each of these 
strategies, with the aim of exploring the experience 
of these speed experts and transferring this 
knowledge to practitioners from various sports.  
Resistance Training Programming  
 
As fully detailed in the original manuscript 
(Loturco et al., 2023b) that underlies this three-
article collection, the typical resistance training 
program prescribed by Olympic Brazilian sprint 
and jump coaches during the off-season period 
consists of 2–4 sessions per week. On average, each 
session lasts more than 60 min and comprises 3–4 
sets of 4–6 or 10–12 repetitions per exercise. 
Throughout the competitive period, resistance 
training sessions are primarily conducted twice a 
week, usually lasting between 46 and 60 min. Each 
session, in general, includes 3–4 sets of 4–6 
repetitions per exercise. Strength-power training 
loads are mainly determined by movement 
velocity (i.e., velocity-based training), although 
some 
coaches 
reveal 
using 
one-repetition 
maximum (1RM) testing or “athlete-dependent” 
methods (Figure 1 displays the relative percentage 
of resistance training loads [% 1RM] used by 
Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump coaches during 
both the preparatory and competitive periods). 
Most coaches stated that they implemented more 
adaptable and flexible training programs, tailoring 
the training content and loads to meet the 
individual demands, needs, and objectives of their 
athletes. Finally, the resistance training sessions 
were predominantly performed on the same day or 
within 24 h after the specific track and field 
training 
sessions. 
For 
further 
information 
regarding the programming practices of Brazilian 
Olympic sprint and jump coaches, please consult 
the manuscript (Loturco et al., 2023b) that 
originated this collection, also published in an  

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
185 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
open-access format in the Journal of Human Kinetics. 
Resistance Training Methods  
 
The resistance training methods most 
frequently employed by Brazilian Olympic sprint 
and jump coaches in their daily practices are listed 
in Table 1 (Loturco et al., 2023b). This table serves 
as a brief introduction to the comprehensive 
description and analysis of each method, as 
presented in this manuscript. 
Variable Resistance Training 
 
Interestingly, VRT appears as the most 
commonly utilized resistance training method 
among Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump coaches 
(mentioned by ~80% of these coaches) (Loturco et 
al., 2023b). Although widely used in numerous 
sports (e.g., soccer, cricket, rugby, basketball, etc.) 
and countries (Loturco et al., 2022a; Weldon et al., 
2021a, 2021c, 2022), in these sports, VRT is usually 
the third or fourth preferred resistance training 
method, as compared to more “traditional” 
training approaches, such as eccentric, concentric, 
and isometric training methods (Loturco et al., 
2022a; Weldon et al., 2021a, 2021c, 2022). From a 
general perspective, the extensive use of VRT in 
elite sports may be related to three different factors: 
(1) low cost of implementation, ease of use, and 
portability—as VRT is predominantly performed 
with elastic bands; (2) the ability and efficiency to 
mimic sport-specific actions and transfer them to 
various sports; and (3) the mechanical advantages 
potentially associated with this training strategy 
(Loturco et al., 2022d, 2023b; Saeterbakken et al., 
2014; Soria-Gila et al., 2015). Specifically for 
Brazilian sprint and jump coaches, the scarcity of 
adequate track and field training facilities and 
equipment across the country (i.e., Brazil) 
frequently requires coaches and practitioners to 
adapt and employ alternative training methods 
(which may explain the high usage of useful and 
practical elastic bands as training tools) (Loturco et 
al., 2023b). Together, these factors probably make 
VRT the most common resistance training method, 
not only within sprint and jump events, but also for 
other track and field disciplines in the Brazilian 
context (Loturco et al., 2023b). 
 
In addition to these reasons, more recently, 
VRT has been proposed as an alternative and 
effective method for optimizing strength gains in 
resistance trained subjects (Loturco et al., 2022d;  
 
 
Soria-Gila et al., 2015). Overall, VRT is prescribed 
using a combination of elastic bands and free 
weights with the objective of maximizing force 
application in the final phase of the movement, 
when the elastic band is overstretched. It is 
important to note that the elastic properties of this 
material allow the initial portion of the concentric 
action, when the elastic band is not stretched, to be 
performed at faster velocities since the external 
resistance is relatively lower compared to the final 
portion (Kubo et al., 2018; Loturco et al., 2022d; 
Saeterbakken et al., 2016). A potential drawback of 
this variability in external resistance is the 
difficulty in quantifying the exact resistance 
provided by the elastic bands. An alternative way 
to establish a “target training zone” is by 
measuring the reductions in movement velocity 
caused by each band and comparing these values 
with those reported in previous velocity-based 
training studies. This can be easily achieved using 
a linear position or a velocity transducer, for 
example 
(Loturco 
et 
al., 
2022d). 
In 
fact, 
Saeterbakken et al. (2014) observed gradual 
increases in the resistance values of 93%, 105%, and 
117% in the lower, middle, and upper positions, 
respectively, during back squats executed with 
elastic bands compared to regular back squats (i.e., 
exercise with only free weights as loading) using a 
6-repetition maximum load. This is indeed an 
exclusive and typical characteristic of VRT, which 
may lead to a series of potential benefits and 
increased responses, such as improvements in 
neuromuscular control and activation, especially 
in the latter stages of the lifting (Aboodarda et al., 
2013; Andersen et al., 2015; Loturco et al., 2022d; 
Rivière et al., 2017). This aspect may be highly 
interesting for sprinters and jumpers who need to 
apply higher levels of force, for example, in the 
final phases of the ground contact during the step 
cycle (Hunter et al., 2005; Loturco et al., 2015a; 
Weyand et al., 2000; Young and Choice, 2007). 
Different studies have confirmed this “theoretical” 
superiority of VRT over traditional resistance 
training 
in 
terms 
of 
maximum 
strength 
development (Anderson et al., 2008; Loturco et al., 
2022d) 
(with 
some 
studies 
reporting 
improvements ~2 and 3 times greater for the bench 
press and squat 1RM, respectively) (Anderson et 
al., 2008). An important point to highlight is that a 
longer study (i.e., ≥ 10 weeks) did not find 
significant differences between groups that trained  
 

186  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
under traditional or variable training conditions 
(Andersen et al., 2015). This suggests that 
advantages provided by VRT may be more evident 
during short-term interventions (i.e., 4–8 weeks) 
(Loturco et al., 2022d), which could be a key 
advantage within team-sport contexts, where pre-
seasons (as well as off-seasons) are usually of very 
short duration (i.e., 4–6 weeks) (Loturco et al., 
2022a, 2022d).  
 
The implementation of combined training 
(VRT + free weight exercises) has also been shown 
to be effective in developing power-related 
qualities, provided that certain aspects are 
considered. In this regard, VRT should be 
prescribed in conjunction with light-loads (i.e., bar-
velocities ranging from 1.0 to 1.2 m·s−1; ~30–40% 
half squat 1RM) (Loturco et al., 2023c) and 
preferably using ballistic exercises (e.g., loaded 
jump squats) (Loturco et al., 2022d). Nevertheless, 
it is worth noting that traditional movements 
(without using elastic bands) still tend to be 
superior for developing muscle power under 
ballistic conditions, which may be logical from 
some perspectives. Without reducing takeoff or 
throwing velocity in the final portion of the 
concentric phase during a ballistic action (the 
“natural effect” of using elastic bands), we can also 
increase power production and, potentially, 
improve the transfer to power performance 
(Cormie et al., 2011; Loturco et al., 2022d). 
Curiously, the same mechanical phenomenon (i.e., 
the gradual increase in force application across the 
entire range of motion) is likely responsible for the 
higher magnitude in neuromuscular adaptations—
resulting in superior enhancements in maximum 
strength 
and 
jumping 
capacity—commonly 
observed after the implementation of VRT, in 
comparison with more traditional free weight 
training schemes (Anderson et al., 2008; Joy et al., 
2016; Loturco et al., 2022d). Indeed, the progressive 
increase in the rate of elastic tension that occurs 
during VRT requires athletes to continuously 
accelerate the load throughout the range of motion 
(Anderson et al., 2008; Joy et al., 2016; Soria-Gila et 
al., 2015). This is in contrast to traditional free 
weight training, where athletes must decelerate 
during the “sticking period”—the phase of the 
movement characterized by a temporary and 
expected reduction in force application, and, 
consequently, in movement velocity (Tillaar and 
Ettema, 
2009). 
Subsequently, 
the 
external  
 
 
implement (e.g., a weighted barbell) will decelerate 
to stop the movement at the end of the concentric 
phase. Therefore, from a practical standpoint, the 
continued acceleration given as the “rationale” for 
the use of elastic bands (or alternative forms of 
variable resistances, such as adding light or heavy 
chains) in conjunction with free weights may better 
reflect the continued acceleration required in the 
majority of sport tasks (Anderson et al., 2008; Joy et 
al., 2016; Loturco et al., 2022d; Soria-Gila et al., 
2015), thus allowing for greater transference to 
sport-specific performance (Cormie et al., 2011; 
Loturco et al., 2022d). Coaches should take into 
account 
the 
specific, 
and 
perhaps 
unique, 
mechanical aspects of VRT when designing 
resistance training sessions for their athletes in 
many sports. As mentioned earlier, the potential 
benefits of optimizing strength adaptations over 
short periods may be a crucial factor when 
selecting training methods in modern sports, 
where time constraints are always an issue. This 
could be an obvious and interesting advantage of 
incorporating VRT into their regular training 
routines. 
Eccentric and Concentric Training (and 
Machine-Based Training) 
Among the different resistance training 
modalities, 63%, 58%, and 53% of Brazilian 
Olympic sprint and jump coaches reported using 
eccentric, concentric, and machine-based training, 
respectively (Loturco et al., 2023b). Regarding 
eccentric training, its prescription mainly relies on 
the premise that this training method has been 
shown to: (1) improve stretch-shortening cycle 
function, 
and 
strength, 
power, 
and 
speed 
performance in different athletic populations 
(Douglas et al., 2017b; Mcneill et al., 2019); (2) 
reduce injury risk and its incidence in sprint-based 
sports (Križaj et al., 2022) where the hip extensor 
muscles are heavily (and eccentrically) taxed 
(Kenneally-Dabrowski et al., 2019); and (3) elicit 
important specific and positive morphological 
along with structural adaptations (e.g., changes in 
muscle hypertrophy and architecture and tendon 
properties) (Križaj et al., 2022; Timmins et al., 
2021). 
For example, in a laboratory-based study, 
a 6-week eccentric training protocol (i.e., eccentric-
only knee flexor training executed on an isokinetic 
dynamometer) resulted in important architectural  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
187 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
alterations of the biceps femoris long head (i.e., 
increased 
fascicle 
length) 
compared 
to 
a 
concentric-only program (Timmins et al., 2016). In 
a more applied research setting, a sample of 
professional Australian football players completed 
either a flywheel or a Nordic hamstring exercise 
program during the pre- and in-season periods 
(Timmins et al., 2021). Those authors observed 
greater biceps femoris long head fascicle lengths 
post-intervention in both groups, confirming the 
effectiveness of this training method in inducing 
morphological alterations at the muscular level. 
These changes are noteworthy (and desired) since 
increased fascicle lengths may “protect” the 
hamstrings by enhancing their capacity to 
withstand stretching and decreasing sarcomere 
strain during high-speed running activities in 
which this muscle group is actively lengthened 
(Gérard et al., 2020). Nevertheless, caution is 
necessary when implementing eccentric exercises 
(e.g., Nordics) due to the muscle damaging nature 
of this type of muscle contraction (i.e., a 
phenomenon 
described 
as 
“exercise-induced 
muscle damage”; [EIMD]) if training is not 
properly prescribed, which may result, for 
example, in elevated levels of delayed onset 
muscle soreness (DOMS) (Proske and Morgan, 
2001).     
Another 
important 
consideration 
concerning eccentric training relates to its influence 
on strength-power-speed performance (Douglas et 
al., 2017b; Križaj et al., 2022; Mcneill et al., 2019). 
For instance, De Hoyo et al. (2014) concluded that 
a 10-week eccentric-overload training protocol 
(i.e., squat and leg-curl exercises using flywheel 
ergometers) applied to a sample of young soccer 
players resulted in meaningful improvements in 
vertical jumping and sprinting abilities when 
compared to a control group that only performed 
their regular soccer technical-tactical training. 
Moreover, greater eccentric strength in knee 
flexors and knee extensors has been associated 
with faster completion times and superior 
deceleration abilities during aggressive directional 
changes (i.e., 180º COD task) (Jones et al., 2016). 
This may be explained, at least in part, by the fact 
that considerable braking forces and pronounced 
eccentric muscle actions are required to reduce the 
center of mass velocity during sharp COD 
maneuvers (Dos’ Santos et al., 2018). Thus, aligned 
with this idea, a compelling body of evidence  
 
 
supports the effectiveness of eccentric training 
strategies in improving COD ability (Chaabene et 
al., 2018). 
With respect to concentric training, a 
comprehensive study that assessed 303 elite male 
and female athletes from various sports (i.e., 
soccer, futsal, rugby, and handball) observed that 
those capable of producing greater mechanical 
power in the concentric phase of the half squat and 
jump squat exercises displayed, overall, superior 
sprint, jump, and COD abilities (Loturco et al., 
2018b). It is important to note that the half squat 
and the jump squat were “pure” concentric actions, 
as players were instructed to pause at the bottom 
of the squat (i.e., thighs at ~90°) before executing 
the upward phase of the lift as fast as possible, thus 
eliminating the contribution of the eccentric 
portion of the movement. Hence, it appears that 
“pure” concentric force and power generating 
capabilities are important determinants of linear 
and multidirectional sprint and vertical jump 
performance (Loturco et al., 2018b). In addition, 
several studies (De La Cruz et al., 2023; Pareja-
Blanco et al., 2016; Randell et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 
2022) have demonstrated the effectiveness of 
“concentric-oriented” resistance training programs 
(e.g., 
velocity-based 
training 
programs) 
in 
improving physical performance measures (e.g., 
sprint speed or vertical jump measures) in trained 
individuals. It is not surprising then that elite 
sprint and jump coaches utilize this training 
method within their programming. 
It is also worth noting that half of the 
Brazilian coaches (53%) indicated using machine-
based training as part of their resistance training 
routines. This choice may be related to the fact that, 
as reported by Healy et al. (2021), sprint coaches 
usually select exercises based on two main aspects: 
(1) the muscle groups involved (i.e., whether or not 
they are important for sprinting); and (2) 
practicality (i.e., whether they are easy to 
implement and execute). Therefore, machine-
based exercises may be a reasonable option given 
that they “check both boxes”. Moreover, recent 
research found no differences in dynamic and 
isometric strength, hypertrophy, vertical jump 
adaptations (Haugen et al., 2023), and muscle 
architecture changes (Hernández-Belmonte et al., 
2023) when comparing the effects of free-weight 
vs. 
machine-based 
strength 
training, 
thus 
indicating that both training modalities may be  
 

188  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
effective for improving performance. In essence, it 
appears that choosing one over the other is down 
to individual preference, but authors also mention 
that it is likely that a combination of both strategies 
would be ideal (Haugen et al., 2023). Based on the 
previous concepts and considering the most 
determinant muscle groups in sprinting (i.e., hip 
and knee flexors and extensors, and ankle plantar 
flexors) (Novacheck, 1998), equipment like the leg-
extension, leg-curl, multi-hip, hip-thruster, or 
standing calf-raiser machines can be incorporated 
into the resistance training programs of elite and 
young athletes engaged in high-intensity running-
based sports, particularly when combined with 
traditional and ballistic free-weight exercises (e.g., 
squats, jump squats, lunges or deadlifts). 
In summary, from a practical perspective, 
coaches are recommended to utilize and combine a 
variety of resistance training methods in their 
programming. Eccentric training may be preferred 
for 
injury 
prevention, 
to 
promote 
desired 
morphological 
alterations 
(i.e., 
positive 
adaptations 
in 
muscle 
architecture 
or 
hypertrophy), 
or 
to 
enhance 
an 
athlete’s 
deceleration and COD capabilities. However, its 
application close to important training sessions or 
competitions should be carefully considered due to 
the potential damaging nature of eccentric muscle 
actions. Finally, concentric and machine-based 
training may be complementary, according to 
individual preferences and practicality, aiming to 
improve strength, power, and speed performance 
throughout the competitive season. 
Isometric Training  
Although isometric training is becoming 
increasingly popular within the scientific and 
coaching communities, only 37% of Brazilian 
Olympic sprint and jump coaches reported using 
this method on a regular basis with their athletes 
(Loturco et al., 2023b). This might be explained by 
the fact that sprinting and jumping are dynamic 
activities that mainly involve the use of the stretch-
shortening cycle (Novacheck, 1998), which means 
that isometric contractions are not as determinant 
for these specific skills (Loturco et al., 2023b). 
Nevertheless, practitioners should not overlook 
the potential benefits of adding isometric strength 
training to their regular programming routines.  
Bimson et al. (2017) investigated the effects 
of a 6-week maximal isometric knee extension  
 
 
training intervention (i.e., 3-s contractions at 7 joint 
angles: 108º, 96º, 78º, 60º, 42º, 24º, and 12º) 
performed once a week alongside soccer-specific 
training and observed significant improvements in 
vertical jump height when compared to a control 
group. Similarly, Lum et al. (2023) concluded that 
the inclusion of long-term (i.e., 24 consecutive 
weeks) or periodic (i.e., two 6-week periods over 24 
weeks) isometric training resulted in significantly 
greater gains in linear sprint performance 
compared to a control group in a sample of 
floorball athletes. Furthermore, when performed 
as fast as possible, isometric contractions have also 
been 
reported 
to 
result 
in 
meaningful 
improvements in explosive strength, as assessed 
by the means of the rate of force development 
(RFD) (Lum and Barbosa, 2019). Therefore, recent 
research seems to support the use of isometrics to 
improve athletic performance measures, mainly 
when prescribed as a complement to sport-specific 
training or combined with dynamic strength-
power exercises (Lum and Barbosa, 2019).  
Notably, isometric contractions have been 
shown to have a lower metabolic cost than 
dynamic contractions (Newham et al., 1995). The 
reduced energy demand of isometric training 
suggests that lower levels of post-exercise fatigue 
may be expected (Lum and Barbosa, 2019). From 
an applied standpoint, this training method could 
be considered an alternative to dynamic strength 
training that coaches can utilize during congested 
periods of the season when recovery is paramount. 
A suitable strategy could be to replace some 
dynamic exercises (e.g., half squat) with an 
isometric variation of the same exercise, or to 
reduce the total number of dynamic contractions 
during the workout (i.e., prescribe less sets and 
repetitions), replacing them with short, high-
intensity isometric contractions. A crucial aspect to 
consider, nevertheless, is the concept of “joint-
angle specificity” as it pertains to isometric 
training. This concept arises from the multiple 
observations 
that 
post-isometric 
training 
adaptations seem to be maximized around the joint 
angles used during the training sessions (Kubo et 
al., 2006; Lanza et al., 2019; Lum and Barbosa, 2019; 
Noorkõiv et al., 2014). Hence, practitioners are 
recommended to prescribe isometrics at different 
joint angles, especially when the main objective is 
to improve athletic (dynamic) performance (Lum 
and Barbosa, 2019).  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
189 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
A recurrent theme highlighted in the 
scientific literature is the possible existence of two 
different types of isometric actions: (1) “holding 
isometric muscle actions” (HIMAs), also termed 
“yielding isometrics”, which consist of an 
isometric action employed to resist an eccentric 
(lengthening) 
contraction 
(i.e., 
isometrically 
maintaining/holding a position with or without 
external resistance, as in a wall-squat); and (2) 
“pushing isometric muscle actions” (PIMAs), also 
called “overcoming isometrics”, which essentially 
correspond to an isometric action in which an 
individual pulls/pushes against an immovable 
object, attempting to generate movement (e.g., an 
isometric mid-thigh pull) (Garner et al., 2008; 
Schaefer and Bittmann, 2017). Theoretically, HIMA 
is an eccentrically-biased exercise since the aim is 
to prevent muscle lengthening. In contrast, PIMA 
is more closely related to a concentric contraction 
(i.e., the intent is to move a fixed load through a 
muscle shortening action) (Garner et al., 2008). 
Based on the above-mentioned, the former may be 
recommended to enhance eccentric strength and 
deceleration capabilities, while the latter would be 
more suitable for developing concentric-based 
strength and acceleration abilities. However, this 
hypothesis requires further exploration, and future 
studies should examine the relationships between 
these two different isometric actions (i.e., HIMA 
and PIMA) and athletic performance measures, as 
well as motor tasks. This investigation should 
focus specifically on activities involving eccentric 
and concentric contractions, such as horizontal 
decelerations and accelerations. 
Isometric 
training 
has 
also 
been 
considered a promising resistance training method 
from an injury prevention and rehabilitation 
perspective. As demonstrated by Rio et al. (2015), 
isometric contractions can have an acute analgesic 
effect in team-sport athletes (i.e., volleyball 
players) with patellar tendinopathy, commonly 
referred to as “jumper’s knee”, as players reported 
lower pain scores for at least 45 min post-exercise. 
Furthermore, in another investigation led by the 
same authors (Rio et al., 2017), the effects of 
completing a 4-week isotonic muscle contraction 
protocol (i.e., 4 x 8 repetitions at 80% of 1RM of the 
leg extension exercise) versus an isometric muscle 
contraction intervention (i.e., 5 x 45-s holds at 80% 
of the maximal voluntary contraction [MVC]) were 
analyzed and compared. The results showed that  
 
 
the latter resulted in a significantly greater 
decrease in tendon pain during the in-season 
period in which players continued their regular 
training 
and 
competition 
schedule. 
As 
a 
consequence, 
including 
isometrics 
before 
a 
workout 
or 
a 
competition 
may 
enhance 
performance in athletes with tendinopathy due to 
the immediate and long-lasting pain relief (Rio et 
al., 2015, 2017). Finally, another noteworthy aspect 
is the “protective effect” that isometric muscle 
actions may have against exercise-induced muscle 
damage, when performed 2–4 days before intense 
exercise, as a pre-conditioning activity (Boyd et al., 
2023), which reinforces the usefulness of this type 
of 
resistance 
training 
method 
during 
the 
competitive season. 
In 
conclusion, 
although 
not 
widely 
prescribed by Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches, isometric training may contribute to 
improved maximum and explosive strength (i.e., 
RFD), and jump and sprint performance. In this 
regard, 
coaches 
should 
primarily 
consider 
prescribing PIMA across a range of joint angles, 
with short duration (i.e., 3–5 s), using maximal or 
near-maximal contractions (i.e., 80–100% MVC), 
executed as fast as possible, with a total volume of 
30–90 s per session (Lum and Barbosa, 2019). 
Conversely, if the goal is to take advantage of the 
isometric 
exercise-induced 
analgesia, 
HIMA 
should 
be 
preferred, 
incorporating 
lower 
contraction intensities (e.g., 70–80% MVC) and 
longer duration (i.e., ~45 s). 
Complex Training 
 
When it comes to resistance training 
methods utilized for speed development, complex 
training 
(considered 
a 
“tertiary 
method”: 
methodologies that do not mimic or reflect sprint 
movements, but provide important stimuli that 
may lead to positive adaptations in sprint 
performance) (Zabaloy et al., 2023), is one of the 
most commonly employed by coaches working at 
the elite level in different sports (Loturco et al., 
2023b; Weldon et al., 2021b). The term “complex 
training” is used to describe training strategies that 
alternate movement velocity or loads between sets 
and/or exercises in the same strength-power 
training session, with the aim of optimizing slow 
and fast force production (Cormier et al., 2022). A 
recent literature review (Cormier et al., 2022) 
identified different complex training strategies,  
 

190  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
with complex contrast training (CCT) being the 
most typically prescribed. In brief, CCT consists of 
alternating 
high-load/low-velocity 
and 
low-
load/high-velocity exercises in a set-by-set fashion 
in the same session (Cormier et al., 2022) and has 
been reported to lead to positive adaptations in 
speed-power capabilities, specifically in linear 
sprinting and COD speed (Cormier et al., 2020; 
Freitas et al., 2017; Marshall et al., 2021; Thapa et 
al., 2021).  
 
To date, the mechanisms underlying 
improvements in athletic performance following 
CCT are yet to be fully elucidated. Some authors 
suggest 
that 
including 
a 
high-intensity 
conditioning activity (CA) (e.g., half-squat) before 
an explosive low-load/high-velocity exercise (e.g., 
a vertical jump), may increase motor neuron 
excitability and reflex potentiation (Ebben et al., 
2004). Other authors propose that completing a CA 
may 
elicit 
a 
“post-activation 
performance 
enhancement” response, believed to occur due to 
acute 
variations 
in 
muscle 
temperature, 
muscle/cellular 
fluid 
content, 
or 
even 
to 
motivational aspects (Blazevich and Babault, 2019; 
Cormier et al., 2022; Cuenca-Fernández et al., 
2017). These responses essentially prime the 
central 
nervous 
system, 
facilitate 
muscle 
activation, and result in a (transient) increase in 
maximal 
strength-speed-power 
performance 
(Blazevich and Babault, 2019; Cormier et al., 2022; 
Cuenca-Fernández et al., 2017). Finally, another 
hypothesis is that the effectiveness of CCT can be 
explained by its mixed-training approach, where 
exercises stimulating different areas of the force-
velocity spectrum (i.e., high-force and high-
velocity portions of the force-velocity spectrum) 
are performed within the same session (Cormier et 
al., 2020, 2022; Haff and Nimphius, 2012), 
potentially improving both slow and fast force 
expression. Nonetheless, despite ongoing debates 
about its underlying mechanisms, CCT remains 
extensively used in practical settings (Ebben et al., 
2004; Simenz et al., 2005). 
 
In fact, CCT is the primary strategy used to 
integrate plyometric exercises within resistance 
training programs across a variety of sports, 
including ice hockey (Ebben et al., 2004), basketball 
(Simenz et al., 2005), rugby (Jones et al., 2016), and 
soccer (Weldon et al., 2021c), as reported by 
professional strength and conditioning coaches. 
Interestingly, the percentage of practitioners in  
 
 
individual sports (i.e., Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches) that declared prescribing plyometrics as 
part of CCT was slightly lower (42%) than in team-
sports (57%, 60%, 58%, and 52% in ice-hockey, 
basketball, rugby, and soccer, respectively). This 
difference is likely attributed to the match-
congested schedules and the typically shorter 
strength and conditioning sessions in sports like 
soccer (i.e., a typical session lasts around 30–45 
min) (Loturco et al., 2022a; Weldon et al., 2021c) 
compared to track and field events, where the most 
frequent session duration is between 61 and 75 min 
in the preparatory period and 46–60 min during 
the competitive phase of the season (Loturco et al., 
2023b). Therefore, it appears that CCT is a suitable 
and recurrent option in time-constrained contexts, 
which occur much more frequently in team-sport 
disciplines. 
In terms of programming, responses to 
CCT interventions are highly individualized, as 
athletes’ characteristics (e.g., relative strength or 
the performance level) may affect training 
outcomes (Cormier et al., 2022). Specifically, 
research indicates that low training frequencies 
(i.e., 2 sessions per week) may be sufficient to 
induce meaningful performance improvements 
(Freitas et al., 2017). Moreover, in team-sports, 
greater speed-related adaptations have been 
shown to occur when submaximal CAs (<85% 
1RM) are used (Cormier et al., 2020; Freitas et al., 
2017), conceivably due to this loading scheme 
resulting in: (1) a positive acute potentiation-
fatigue relationship that facilitates the execution of 
the explosive exercise of the contrast pair (Cormier 
et al., 2022); and (2) greater overall movement 
velocities during the workout, which can be a 
potent stimulus to elicit speed-related adaptations 
(Behm and Sale, 1993; Mcbride et al., 2002). Lastly, 
when prescribing CCT programs, it is worth noting 
that although the long-term adaptations to 
different intra-contrast rest intervals remain 
largely unknown, different meta-analyses have 
revealed that rest periods longer than 2 min 
between the CA and the subsequent exercise seem 
to lead to superior performance outcomes 
(Cormier et al., 2020; Freitas et al., 2017). 
Nonetheless, it should be mentioned that weaker 
individuals may benefit from longer rest intervals 
(i.e., ≥ 7–8 min), even though this may not always 
be “practical” in real training settings. Conversely, 
shorter rest intervals (i.e., from 2 to 5 min) may be  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
191 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
adequate to induce relevant long-term adaptations 
in stronger individuals. This also highlights the 
importance 
of 
practitioners 
adjusting 
these 
intervals and determining the optimal “intra-
contrast rest intervals” tailored to their athletes 
before implementing a CCT intervention (Cormier 
et al., 2020; Freitas et al., 2017). 
In summary, CCT is a time-efficient 
method that may be beneficial for speed 
development, particularly in contexts where the 
time available for strength-power training sessions 
is limited (e.g., team-sports or during the 
competitive period in track and field). The 
mechanisms underlying the adaptations following 
CCT are not fully understood, but current evidence 
indicates that moderate loads (<85% 1RM) and low 
training frequencies may result in meaningful 
improvements in sprint performance (Cormier et 
al., 2020, 2022). This emphasizes the practical and 
advantageous applicability of this training strategy 
year-round in both individual and team-sports, 
encompassing athletes with diverse performance 
levels and backgrounds, including youth and adult 
populations. 
Isoinertial Training  
During the use of traditional resistance 
exercises (e.g., squats, deadlifts) equalized loads 
are employed for both the concentric and eccentric 
phases of the lift (Murton et al., 2023). Furthermore, 
during eccentric contractions, muscles act while 
lengthening due to the applied external resistance 
that exceeds the momentary force produced by the 
muscle (Beato, 2020; Douglas et al., 2017a). This 
mechanical advantage also serves as the basis for 
incorporating flywheel exercises, in which the 
eccentric phase experiences an overload due to the 
inertia accumulated during the concentric phase, 
provided the latter is executed with maximal intent 
and effort (Maroto-Izquierdo et al., 2017). Under 
these circumstances, it seems reasonable for 
strength and conditioning coaches in numerous 
sports to incorporate isoinertial exercises into their 
training 
programs. 
Despite 
these 
potential 
advantages, specifically, only 16% of Brazilian 
Olympic sprint and jump coaches declared using 
inertial exercises with their athletes (Loturco et al., 
2023b). The low percentage of isoinertial training 
usage among Brazilian coaches is likely related to 
the absence of isoinertial devices in Brazilian 
training facilities, owing to the expensive cost and  
 
 
unavailability of this type of equipment (Loturco et 
al., 2022a, 2023b).  
Indeed, track and field athletes, such as 
sprinters and jumpers, may benefit from the 
utilization of eccentric overloading, particularly 
for the lower limbs. In this context, there is a well-
established mechanistic link between running 
mechanics and hamstring strain (Bramah et al., 
2023), which typically occurs during the late-swing 
phase just before the touch-down, with the biceps 
femoris long head being the most commonly 
affected muscle (Zabaloy et al., 2023). Therefore, 
achieving long-term increases in capacities such as 
power, sprint-specific endurance, and technique, 
along 
with 
simultaneous 
enhancements 
in 
sprinting 
performance, 
requires 
maximizing 
adaptations in muscle contractile machinery while 
minimizing the risk of overreaching, excessive 
fatigue, and injuries in highly-specialized athletes 
(Agudo-Ortega et al., 2023; Haugen et al., 2019). 
Isoinertial exercises (e.g., flywheel exercises), with 
their recognized effectiveness in generating a more 
demanding eccentric phase due to the increased 
mechanical load required to absorb the kinetic 
energy stored in the flywheel and gradually 
decelerate this load, may be an important resource 
in this regard (Beato, 2020; Beato et al., 2019; 
Douglas et al., 2017a). 
Isoinertial training using flywheel devices 
has been shown to be effective in improving 
jumping, linear sprinting, and COD abilities in 
soccer players (De Hoyo et al., 2014; Tous-Fajardo 
et al., 2015). Likewise, Murton et al. (2023) reported 
that flywheel and traditional resistance training are 
similarly effective in improving lower-body 
strength and power qualities (i.e., jump tasks) in 
male academy rugby union plyers. In recent 
survey-based studies (Loturco et al., 2022a; 
Weldon et al., 2021a; Zabaloy et al., 2022b), authors 
reported that isoinertial devices were regularly 
used by 25%, 15%, and 6% of coaches and 
practitioners in soccer, cricket, and rugby union, 
respectively. It is important to note that despite the 
advantages and positive points discussed earlier, 
there are some disadvantages associated with the 
use of these devices (Loturco et al., 2022a, 2023b) 
including the expensive costs and difficulties 
observed in precisely controlling and prescribing 
the adequate training load (Beato, 2020). The 
mentioned difficulties may hinder or, at least, 
reduce the possibility for coaches to incorporate  
 

192  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
isoinertial resistance training into their daily 
practices. Furthermore, considering that isoinertial 
devices can be used to mimic traditional strength-
power (e.g., squats, deadlifts) or even machine-
based exercises (e.g., lying leg curls), it could be 
argued that the reported positive effects are also 
dependent on the type of exercise and not solely on 
the technology being applied (De Hoyo et al., 2014; 
Tous-Fajardo et al., 2015).  
 
Overall, as indicated by Beato (2020), 
practitioners should consider two important 
factors when implementing isoinertial training 
with their athletes: (1) current literature suggests 
that flywheel training is a viable alternative to 
traditional weight training methods, although 
there is not enough evidence to suggest that it is 
superior among elite athletes; (2) isoinertial 
training 
produces 
different 
physiological 
responses to other types of resistance exercise or 
resistance training methods. Hence, it seems 
reasonable to incorporate both flywheel and 
traditional resistance training into typical training 
programs to optimize the benefits of these types of 
training. Finally, and equally importantly: if 
coaches lack the resources to acquire or use 
appropriate isoinertial devices, it may be feasible 
and reasonable to apply eccentric training 
overloads through simple yet similarly effective 
exercises and drills, with or without the use of low-
cost equipment (e.g., Nordic hamstring, Swiss ball 
hamstring curls, etc.) (Alonso-Fernandez et al., 
2017; Guruhan et al., 2021). 
Resistance Training Exercises 
The resistance training exercises most 
frequently used by Brazilian Olympic sprint and 
jump coaches in their daily practices are listed in 
Table 2 (Loturco et al., 2023b). This table serves as 
a brief introduction to the comprehensive 
description and analysis of each exercise, including 
their variations and potential utilization, as 
presented in this manuscript. 
Squat and Its Variations  
 
Alongside Olympic weightlifting and its 
derivatives, squats and their variations were the 
only exercises present in the five different lists 
prepared by the Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches. Possible explanations for this preference 
and importance are linked to the confirmed 
effectiveness of this exercise type and its close  
 
 
relationship with acceleration and top-speed 
performance (Loturco et al., 2018a; Wisløff et al., 
2004). Additionally, the applicability and ease of 
executing squats, and lastly, the numerous 
variations that can arise from this traditional 
resistance training exercise certainly contribute to 
its great popularity among practitioners from 
many sports (Loturco et al., 2015b; Weldon et al., 
2021b). Several studies have compared the effects 
and 
biomechanical 
characteristics 
of 
squats 
performed at various depths (e.g., shallow versus 
full squats), loading ranges (e.g., heavy versus light 
loads) and positions (e.g., back versus front squats; 
high versus low barbell squats), revealing valuable 
insights into these aspects (Contreras et al., 2015; 
Goodin, 2015; Gullett et al., 2009; Martínez-Cava et 
al., 2019; Yavuz et al., 2015). Concerning kinetics 
and kinematics, Goodin (2015) demonstrated that 
high barbell back squats tended to produce greater 
peak force, power, and velocity across a 
comprehensive range of loads (i.e., 20–90% 1RM), 
whereas low barbell back squats tended to 
generate a larger impulse, especially above 80% 
1RM. According to that author, a potential reason 
for the superior impulse in the lower barbell back 
squat is derived from the slower (relative) barbell 
velocity. In other words, subjects take a longer time 
to complete this movement, providing them with 
more time to apply force compared to the high 
barbell back squat. Muscle activity and kinematics 
between front and back squats have also been 
another important point of discussion in sport 
science (Contreras et al., 2015; Gullett et al., 2009; 
Yavuz et al., 2015). Generally speaking, in 
comparison with the front squat under maximum 
loading conditions, the back squat exhibits a 
greater trunk lean, without presenting meaningful 
differences in the knee joint kinematics across the 
entire range of motion, which may be interesting 
for preventing and reducing possible lumbar 
injuries and pain (Yavuz et al., 2015). In addition, 
despite requiring lighter loads, the front squat can 
result in higher electromyography activity in the 
vastus medialis and lead to less compressive forces 
and lower knee extensor moments on the knee joint 
(Gullett et al., 2009; Kaardal, 2019). Therefore, this 
squat variation becomes a viable alternative for 
focusing on the improvement of knee extensors or 
for reducing the rate of injury and the incidence of 
pain in the lumbar region, particularly during 
heavy loading training programs (Gullett et al.,  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
193 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
2009; Kaardal, 2019; Yavuz et al., 2015).  
 
Other mechanical relationships are also 
affected by the extent of the range of motion across 
different squat modes. Accordingly, increases in 
squat depth considerably alter the load-velocity 
and the load-power relationships among different 
depths of squat (i.e., half, parallel, and full back 
squat) (Martínez-Cava et al., 2019). Martínez-Cava 
et al. (2019) showed that for shorter ranges of 
motion (e.g., half squat versus parallel squat), 
athletes were required to lift heavier loads to 
achieve the same loading magnitude (% 1RM); 
thus, the power output produced during half 
squats was substantially higher than that produced 
in parallel squats. An interesting finding of that 
study is that there was a proportional reduction 
between the mean concentric displacement among 
the three squat variations (i.e., full versus parallel 
squat: −9.9 cm or 15.5%; full versus half squat: −7.6 
cm or 32.6%), whereas there was a disproportional 
increase in the 1RM strength (i.e., full versus 
parallel squat: −7 kg or 8%; parallel versus half 
squat: −37.1 kg or 39.3%). For those authors, this 
significant increase in the 1RM value for the half 
squat was related to the muscle moment arms and 
specific joint angles achieved during the starting 
position of this squat variation. Indeed, the highest 
position adopted during the initial portion of the 
half squat exercise (i.e., smaller ranges of motion 
compared to parallel and full squats) prevents 
athletes from reaching a sticking region (described 
as a “poor biomechanical region”, where the 
capacity to apply force is compromised) (Larsen et 
al., 2021). Of course, these differences should 
influence the choice of squat variations, which 
should be based not only on sport specificity (i.e., 
movements and tasks that athletes regularly 
perform in their sports), but also on their ability to 
properly execute the three squat exercises. It is 
essential to bear in mind that, although deeper 
squats are generally safe, they also demand better 
execution techniques. 
 
Finally, and especially for sprinters and 
jumpers, shallow squats (i.e., ~0–60° of knee 
flexion) (Figure 2) appear as one of the most 
commonly used and useful exercises by track and 
field coaches (responses collected from open-
ended questions; Loturco et al., 2023b). This is 
because, as well as other types of shallower squats 
(i.e., squats with smaller ranges of motion such as 
the half squat), shallow squats allow athletes to  
 
 
utilize heavier loads and move these loads faster 
(compared to deeper squats) (Larsen et al., 2021; 
Martínez-Cava et al., 2019). This substantially 
increases the velocity and the amount of vertical 
force application in a crucial sprinting position for 
sprinters and jumpers during the transition from 
the drive to the top-speed phase (i.e., during this 
phase, athletes should maintain a more upright 
position, and it is essential that the foot strike 
occurs just ahead of the centerline of the body) 
(Jeffreys, 2013). In fact, elite sprinters and jumpers, 
due to their high levels of strength, power, and leg 
stiffness, typically require minimal contact times 
(and minimal flexion in the angles of the ankle, the 
knee, and the hip) when sprinting (Jeffreys, 2013). 
In contrast, “poorer sprinters” (i.e., less specialized 
sprinters) tend to exhibit excessive flexion in the 
ankle, the knee, and the hip when touching the 
ground 
at 
higher 
speeds. 
This, 
in 
turn, 
concomitantly increases braking forces and contact 
time, thereby reducing running speed (Jeffreys, 
2013). In summary, front, back, shallow, half, 
parallel, and full squats are widely used forms of 
squat exercise, that are not limited to track and 
field disciplines, but extend to a wide variety of 
sports.  
 
As general and less detailed rules, it is 
important to emphasize that: (1) deeper squats 
elicit superior adaptations in knee extensor 
muscles and leg lean body mass compared to 
shallower squats (Bloomquist et al., 2013); (2) when 
analyzing EMG activity across distinct squat 
depths (e.g., half, parallel, and full squats), it 
becomes evident that the contribution of the 
gluteus maximus during the concentric phase of 
the lift is considerably higher in full and parallel 
squats compared to shallower movements, such as 
half and shallow squats (Caterisano et al., 2002); (3) 
despite requiring lighter loads to achieve the same 
relative loading range (i.e., % 1RM), front squats 
may be utilized to prevent lumbar injuries and 
pain, while exerting less compressive forces on the 
knees (Gullett et al., 2009; Kaardal, 2019). Three 
final and key points to consider are that: (1) during 
the concentric portion of the lift, athletes will 
achieve the peak velocity progressively earlier in 
shallower squats—a mechanical behaviour that 
can be observed, for example, when comparing 
half, parallel, and full squats under maximum 
loading conditions (Martínez-Cava et al., 2019); (2) 
increases in the range of motion (i.e., deeper  
 

194  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
squats) result in longer moment arms at the knee 
and hip joints, thus activating larger portions of the 
front thighs and gluteus muscles (Bryanton et al., 
2012; Kaardal, 2019) (this can be particularly 
important, for example, for coaches interested in 
developing 
acceleration- 
or 
jumping-related 
capabilities); (3) shallow squats allow athletes to 
lift heavier loads at higher velocities, consequently 
producing greater levels of vertical force in a more 
upright position. This approach is more similar to 
the body position adopted during top-speed 
phases and may be highly recommended for 
coaches aiming to enhance the top-speed qualities 
of their athletes. Practitioners from various sports 
can use this information to choose the most 
suitable squat variations for their athletes.  
Olympic Weightlifting and Derivatives 
In a broader perspective, weightlifting can 
be defined as a competitive sport that requires 
athletes to lift a maximal amount of weight in the 
snatch and the clean and jerk (Morris et al., 2022). 
The latter two major exercises are further divided 
into 
more 
simplistic 
exercise 
regressions: 
“pulling”, “catching”, and “overhead” derivatives. 
In the pulling versions, the catch phase of the lift is 
removed, whereas for the catch derivatives, the 
depth at which the barbell is caught is altered so 
that the top of the thigh is above parallel (i.e., 
“power versions”). These catch derivatives can 
also be initiated from a variety of positions, such as 
the floor, knee, hang or mid-thigh positions 
(Comfort et al., 2023). Importantly, athletes from 
different sports may benefit from weightlifting 
pulling derivatives due to the reduced technical 
complexity compared with catching derivatives. 
The exclusion of the catch phase reduces the 
relative complexity of pulling derivatives, making 
these derivatives naturally easier to teach and learn 
(Comfort et al., 2023). Another factor worth 
considering is related to the possibility of applying 
a wide range of loads (e.g., from 30% to 140% 1RM) 
in the “pull” compared to “catch” variations 
(Suchomel et al., 2020). Catching derivatives, on 
the other hand, are more complex to execute and 
do not allow for the use of supramaximal loads 
(Comfort et al., 2023). Nevertheless, authors have 
already reported some important benefits, such as 
postural strength, coordinated loaded triple 
extension and flexion of the knee, hip, and ankle 
joints, providing a “load acceptance” stimulus 
comparable to that found during a jump landing,  
 
along with the co-contraction of the spinal 
stabilizing muscles (Comfort et al., 2023). 
When Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches were asked whether they used Olympic 
weightlifting and associated derivatives in their 
resistance training programs, 79%, 58%, and 47% 
of coaches reported using the snatch, the clean, and 
the clean and jerk, respectively (Loturco et al., 
2023b). Only a minority of these coaches (< 16%) 
declared using the power clean or the power 
snatch or responded that they did not adopt these 
techniques (5%) (Loturco et al., 2023b). These 
outcomes reinforce the notion that this training 
strategy has a very important place in terms of the 
program design and programming during the 
training process of elite track and field athletes. 
Notably, the low number of coaches that declared 
using weightlifting derivatives is somewhat 
surprising due to the fact that these variations may 
allow coaches to use simpler and easy-to-coach 
movements. In fact, practitioners should integrate 
Olympic weightlifting, traditional strength-power 
training, and plyometrics into a more holistic and 
comprehensive training routine when attempting 
to enhance athletic performance in other sports 
(Comfort et al., 2023). Specifically, Olympic 
sprinters and jumpers may benefit greatly from 
developing rapid force production, given the 
maximal or near maximal-force production and 
velocity observed throughout the entire range of 
motion 
of 
these 
movements 
compared 
to 
traditional resistance training (e.g., deadlift, back 
squat) (Crenshaw et al., 2023). Similarly, Olympic 
weightlifting and its derivatives, along with the 
squat and its variations, were the two most popular 
exercises in other field-based team-sports, such as 
(international) 
soccer, 
rugby, 
cricket, 
and 
basketball (Simenz et al., 2005; Weldon et al., 2021a, 
2021c; Zabaloy et al., 2022b). In this regard, the 
latter clearly emphasizes the importance that 
coaches give and devote to weightlifting and 
derivatives 
during 
the 
resistance 
training 
prescription. Nonetheless, there are several aspects 
that need to be analyzed when selecting and 
prescribing these exercises: (1) the technical 
competency of athletes to execute the lifts, 
individually and as a group; (2) the previous 
experience of athletes with these techniques; (3) the 
time needed to properly teach these movements to 
athletes, ensuring they go through a progressive 
educational process from early childhood; and (4)  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
195 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
the fact that, up to the present day, there is no clear 
evidence 
of 
the 
superiority 
of 
Olympic 
weightlifting over traditional resistance training 
involving different types of strength-power 
exercises (Berton et al., 2022; Crenshaw et al., 2023; 
Morris et al., 2022). 
Given 
the 
time-consuming 
aspects 
inherent in the teaching process of weightlifting, 
coaches working with large groups of athletes on a 
daily basis (i.e., team-sports) may find it 
challenging, for example, to properly coach and 
teach the snatch and the clean and jerk during the 
annual season. On the other hand, pulling 
variations may be better suited to address the 
challenges faced by practitioners. This is not only 
due to the aforementioned reasons, but also 
because it has been reported that implementing a 
wide range of loads (i.e., from 30% to 140% 1RM) 
with pulling derivatives results in superior 
adaptations in relative strength, sprint speed, and 
COD performance compared to sub-maximally 
loaded 
weightlifting 
catching 
and 
pulling 
derivatives (Suchomel et al., 2020). Likewise, 
Morris et al. (2022) reported that weightlifting was 
most 
effective 
for 
improving 
weightlifting 
performance, while limited differences existed 
between 
this 
training 
method, 
traditional 
resistance training, and plyometrics in terms of 
increasing strength and linear and multidirectional 
sprint speed. As a result, coaches and practitioners 
in individual and team-sports must carefully 
consider and select the most appropriate exercises 
to better prepare their athletes based on the 
adaptations that will be induced (including acute 
and long-term effects) and how these choices may 
affect athletic performance. To date, no clear 
evidence exists regarding the superiority of 
weightlifting (i.e., clean and jerk, and snatch) and 
derivatives like the power versions over traditional 
strength-power exercises in relation to sprint 
performance (Crenshaw et al., 2023; Morris et al., 
2022). In summary, while authors recommend 
integrating 
weightlifting 
techniques 
into 
a 
traditional strength and conditioning program 
(Suchomel et al., 2020), practitioners should also 
consider the challenges and difficulties of 
prescribing and utilizing Olympic weightlifting 
and its derivatives (e.g., complexity, technical 
competency, proper coordination). Therefore, 
depending on the athletes’ training background, 
physical and technical demands, and objectives of  
 
 
the sport they are involved in, coaches may decide 
how, when, and why they should (or should not) 
employ 
weightlifting 
techniques 
with 
their 
athletes. Additionally, they need to determine 
which derivatives are more appropriate and 
specific to meet the needs of their athletes at a 
particular phase of the season (Comfort et al., 2023; 
Suchomel et al., 2015).  
Ballistic Exercises 
The term ballistics derives from the Greek 
“ballein” (Vesilind, 2006), which means to throw, 
and it also refers to projection. Therefore, in 
practical terms, specifically in resistance training, 
ballistic exercises include actions like throwing or 
projecting the body in vertical or horizontal 
directions (e.g., jump exercises) (Loturco et al., 
2023d). According to Cormie et al. (2011) ballistic 
exercises preclude any deceleration phase during 
the concentric portion of the lift, requiring athletes 
to apply force consistently “throughout the entire 
range of motion”, up to the point of projection (i.e., 
jumping takeoff). This mechanical characteristic 
(i.e., 
100% 
accelerative 
movement) 
makes 
ballistics, and especially the jump squat, one of the 
preferred and most popular exercises for track and 
field coaches. In fact, Healy et al. (2021) reported 
that the jump squat was the most commonly 
prescribed ballistic and the second most regularly 
used exercise among qualified sprint coaches, even 
when compared with other traditional, ballistic, 
plyometric, 
and 
unweighted 
jump-type 
movements. A similar trend was observed by 
Bolger et al. (2016) in a study using a survey-style 
approach, which interviewed seven high-level 
sprint coaches about their perceptions and views 
on resistance-based training interventions. In fact, 
for those sprint coaches, the squat jump was the 
most frequently used form of loaded barbell squat 
exercise (Bolger et al., 2016). This high degree of 
importance was also evident in the original survey 
conducted with Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches (Loturco et al., 2023b), who included 
ballistics 
(especially, 
loaded 
jump 
squats; 
responses collected from open-ended questions) in 
four out of the five primary lists of strength-power 
exercises most commonly prescribed in their 
programs, and it was reported to be regularly used 
by ~50% of those coaches. The preference for 
ballistic movements is not exclusive to track and 
field coaches; this tendency may also be observed  
 

196  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
in other sports (Cormie et al., 2011; Cronin et al., 
2001; Newton et al., 1999). In general, these 
exercises can be used in isolation, as part of more 
comprehensive resistance training sessions or even 
as movements integrated within complex training 
routines (e.g., executing a heavy-load dynamic 
exercise before performing a light-load jump 
squat) (Weldon et al., 2021b).  
The choice of ballistic movements is not 
only related to their strong relationships and 
positive effects on a series of performance-related 
variables, 
but 
also 
to 
their 
mechanical 
characteristics (Cormie et al., 2011; Loturco et al., 
2023d). As mentioned earlier, ballistics are entirely 
accelerative, requiring athletes to accelerate across 
the complete range of motion, which, in turn, 
brings some potential advantages to these 
exercises (Cormie et al., 2011; Cronin et al., 2001; 
Loturco et al., 2023d; Newton et al., 1996). For 
Loturco et al. (2023d), these mechanical advantages 
are clear and easily explained, especially when the 
main objective of training is to improve physical 
and technical capabilities that directly depend on 
qualities such as maximum acceleration and speed 
(e.g., sprinting- and jumping-related actions). 
Firstly, it is worth noting that correlations among 
bar-power output, linear sprint and jumping 
abilities tend to be stronger for ballistics compared 
to traditional squats (r = 0.68–0.72 and 0.64–0.67, 
respectively, for average mean and peak power 
values), confirming the sport-specific nature of 
these exercises (Cormie et al., 2011; Loturco et al., 
2023d). In addition, previous studies (Loturco et 
al., 2016, 2021b) have shown that the transfer effect 
coefficient (TEC; i.e., the process by which 
improving performance in a given exercise can 
positively impact performance in sport-specific 
tasks) (Issurin, 2013) is greater for ballistic 
movements 
compared 
to 
their 
non-ballistic 
counterparts (e.g., loaded jump squats vs. back 
squats). A special focus should be given to an 
interesting study on transference, which revealed 
that the loaded jump squat (executed with the load 
that maximizes power output) was superior to 
Olympic push-press in increasing linear and COD 
speed, as well as vertical jumping ability in elite 
young soccer players (Loturco et al., 2016). As 
those authors suggested, the superiority of loaded 
jump squats might be related to their mechanical 
characteristics 
that 
closely 
resembled 
the 
segmental triple extension (without decelerating)  
 
 
exhibited during the sprint strides, particularly 
over the top-speed phases (Loturco et al., 2016, 
2023d).  
Despite the apparent advantage of ballistic 
movements in improving athletic performance 
(Cormie et al., 2011; Kraemer and Newton, 2000; 
Newton et al., 1996, 1999; Wilson et al., 1993), 
Loturco et al. (2022c, 2023d) indicated that, when 
performed under heavy loading conditions (i.e., ≥ 
80% 1RM), the effectiveness of this type of exercise 
may be undermined. This is because at intensities 
~ 80% 1RM (specifically for the loaded jump squat) 
the concentric portion of the lift is almost entirely 
propulsive. As a result, when using these loads, 
athletes do not have to decelerate at the end of the 
concentric phase to return to zero velocity, since 
bar-velocity is too low (Loturco et al., 2022c). This 
mechanical effect not only does not hamper (or 
even preclude) the subsequent jump task, but also 
reduces the differences in kinetic and kinematic 
output between ballistic and traditional (non-
ballistic) exercises (Loturco et al., 2022c, 2023d). 
From 
a 
general 
perspective, 
the 
positive 
differences (i.e., higher peak power, peak force, 
and peak velocity) in favor of the ballistic jump 
squat decrease progressively with increasing loads 
(i.e., from 20 to 80% 1RM) (Loturco et al., 2023d; 
Pérez-Castilla et al., 2020) (Figures 3 and 4). In 
contrast, 
under 
light-to-moderate 
loading 
conditions (i.e., 20–60% 1RM), force and power 
production are substantially higher in ballistic 
exercises. Lighter loads also present another key 
advantage when comparing ballistic with non-
ballistic exercises: under light-loading conditions, 
ballistics exhibit lower levels of strength deficit 
(Figure 4C) (i.e., a variable that represents the 
difference between the force produced at the 1RM 
and any other submaximal force value) (Gonzalez-
Badillo et al., 2017; Loturco et al., 2021c; Zabaloy et 
al., 2022a). In other words, at these intensities, 
athletes are able to apply higher levels of force (at 
higher velocities) against submaximal loads, 
including “unloaded conditions”. This mechanical 
aspect, with its potential implications, offers a 
range of advantages and benefits for athletes of 
multiple sports who have to apply force, as fast as 
possible, against their own body weight, in order 
to jump higher, sprint faster, or execute any sport-
specific actions at high-velocities. Therefore, 
coaches from various sports are highly encouraged 
to systematically incorporate ballistic exercises into  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
197 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
their training routines, bearing in mind that these 
exercises 
may 
preserve 
their 
mechanical 
characteristics and be more effective under light- 
 
to-moderate loading conditions (when compared 
to non-ballistic exercises) (Cormie et al., 2011; 
Loturco et al., 2022b, 2023d; Mcbride et al., 2002). 
 
 
Figure 1. Frequency of responses regarding the relative percentage of resistance training 
loads (% 1RM) utilized by Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump coaches during both 
preparatory and competitive periods. 
 
 
Table 1. Resistance training methods most commonly employed by Brazilian Olympic sprint 
and jump coaches. 
Resistance training method
% of utilization 
Variable resistance 
79% 
Eccentric 
63% 
Concentric 
58% 
Machine-based 
53% 
Isometric 
*Complex 
37% 
21% 
Isoinertial 
16% 
Note: *In the original study (Loturco et al., 2023b), complex training was identified as a 
method primarily employed for speed development. However, for the purpose of clarity and 
understanding, we categorized and described this method as a resistance training method. 
 
Table 2. Resistance training exercises most frequently utilized by Brazilian Olympic sprint 
and jump coaches during both the preparatory and competitive periods. 
Exercise 
% of utilization 
Squat and its variations 
100% 
Olympic weightlifting and derivatives 
100% 
Ballistic exercises 
47% 
Hip thrust 
26% 
Lunge 
21% 
Calf raises 
15% 
Core exercises 
10% 
Leg curl 
5% 
Leg extension 
5% 
Stiﬀ-leg deadlift 
5% 
 

198  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Squat exercise with its variations: (A) shallow squat; (B) half squat; (C) parallel 
squat; (D) full squat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Comparison of peak power and peak velocity between half-squat (HS) and jump 
squat (JS) exercises across different loads. * Indicates significant differences between the 
two exercises (p < 0.05). Panels A and C display means and standard deviations, while 
panels B and D show percentage differences and 95% confidence limits. %1RM = 
percentage of HS 1RM (Loturco et al., 2023d). 
 
 
 
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
199 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of peak force and strength deficit between half-squat (HS) and 
jump squat (JS) exercises across different loads. * Indicates significant differences 
between the two exercises (p < 0.05). Panels A and C display means and standard 
deviations, while panels B and D show percentage differences and 95% confidence limits. 
%1RM = percentage of HS 1RM (Loturco et al., 2023d). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hip Thrust  
 
The hip thrust is included in four out of the 
five 
principal 
lists 
of 
resistance 
exercises 
prescribed by Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches (Loturco et al., 2023b). This exercise is 
regularly utilized by ~30% of Olympic sprint and 
jump coaches (Loturco et al., 2023b) for a simple 
reason declared by an expert sprint coach in the 
Healy et al.’s study (2021): “the hip thrust 
strengthens the glutes, which are the primary hip 
extensor”. Indeed, the primary and secondary hip 
extensors (i.e., gluteus maximus, hamstrings, 
hamstring part of adductor magnus, adductors 
and posterior fibers of gluteus medius and 
minimus, along with some muscles that act as 
posterior vertebral stabilizers, such as the erector 
spinae) tend to be highly recruited during the  
 
execution of hip thrusts (Contreras et al., 2011). 
With a focus on antero-posterior force production, 
this exercise can optimize strength development 
production at the "end-range of hip extension in 
the gluteus maximus, thereby improving its 
relative contribution to the hamstrings during hip 
extension" (Contreras et al., 2011)–an essential 
aspect for sprinters (Andersen et al., 2018; Williams 
et al., 2021). However, the widespread use of the 
hip thrust among sprint, jump, and track and field 
coaches from various disciplines (Healy et al., 2021; 
Loturco et al., 2023b; Mendez-Rebolledo et al., 
2021) 
is 
not 
solely 
associated 
with 
its 
biomechanical characteristics, but also with its 
perceived, 
and 
confirmed, 
effectiveness 
in 
enhancing athletic performance (Contreras et al., 
2017; Dello Iacono et al., 2017, 2018; Neto et al., 
2019).  

200  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
Indeed, the close relationship between hip 
thrust output and sprint performance, especially 
during the maximum acceleration phase, was 
previously observed in a study conducted with 
elite sprinters (Loturco et al., 2018a). In that study, 
there was a positive correlation of 0.93 between hip 
thrust power and 10-m sprint speed. Vallance 
(2017) found similar results in a study involving 
recreationally 
active 
subjects 
(males 
only), 
showing negative correlations of approximately 
−0.70, −0.60, and −0.65 between hip thrust strength 
and 40-yard, 10-yard, and 20-yard split times, 
respectively. Interestingly, in the Vallance’s study 
(2017), the correlations observed between hip 
thrust strength and sprint speed were stronger 
than those detected between back squat strength 
and sprint speed. The findings from Williams et al. 
(2021) may, at least partially, explain these 
outcomes. With a sample of twelve male team-
sport athletes, those researchers demonstrated that 
the ground reaction force, measured via force 
plates, was lower in the hip thrust in comparison 
to 
the 
back 
squat. 
Nevertheless, 
peak 
electromyography activity of the gluteus maximus, 
assessed in both legs and expressed as a percentage 
of the maximum voluntary isometric contraction, 
was higher in the hip thrust than in the back and 
split squat exercises. According to those authors, 
“the increased activation of the gluteus maximus 
during the hip thrust and its relationship with 
maximal running speed suggests that this 
movement may be optimal for training this muscle 
group, compared to the back squat and the split 
squat” (Williams et al., 2021). Importantly, and 
specifically in this case, this inference is based on 
an exercise that is capable of inducing greater 
gluteus maximus activity and, thereby, results in a 
significant increase in horizontal force production, 
which may induce positive transfer to sprint 
performance (Contreras et al., 2017; Loturco et al., 
2018a; Williams et al., 2021). 
Abade et al. (2021) reinforced these 
findings by comparing the effects of adding either 
“vertical or horizontal force-vector exercises” (i.e., 
a 
back-half-squat 
or 
a 
barbell 
hip-thrust, 
respectively) 
to 
a 
general 
strength-training 
program (e.g., upper limb and core exercises) for 
youth soccer players. Overall, both training 
approaches improved sprinting and jumping 
abilities, but the hip-thrust showed greater 
transference to 10- and 20-m sprint speed (Abade  
 
 
et al., 2021). Despite differences in study designs, 
Ribeiro et al. (2019) found similar results when 
comparing the effects of two distinct training 
regimens: vertical + horizontal plyometrics versus 
squat + hip thrust exercises executed at the 
optimum power load in young male soccer players 
during the competitive season. After 12 training 
sessions, it was concluded that both training 
schemes led to increases in a number of jump- and 
speed-related qualities. However, the combination 
of squats and hip thrust exercises performed at 
their respective optimum power zones (i.e., 
utilizing loads that maximize power output) was 
superior in enhancing 30-m linear sprint and COD 
abilities (Ribeiro et al., 2019). Finally, in a recent 
study, Freitas et al. (2023) demonstrated that a 
multi-training protocol, incorporating vertical and 
horizontal strength-power exercises (including the 
hip thrust), was superior to a traditional vertical 
training protocol (e.g. squats = drop jumps) in 
improving zigzag velocity among highly-trained 
under-20 soccer players during a short soccer pre-
season. A counterpoint can be found in the study 
by Jarvis et al. (2019), who did not observe a 
positive transfer of hip thrust strength into 
improvements in 40-m sprint performance in 
collegiate level athletes. Nonetheless, it is worth 
noting that in the Jarvis et al.’s study (2019), 
collegiate athletes were submitted to a very heavy 
loading condition during the resistance training 
sessions (heavy barbell hip thrusts at 85% 1RM), 
which 
might 
have 
affected 
the 
potential 
adaptations in speed-related abilities, especially 
for collegiate level athletes. However, this does not 
mean that the actual effects of hip thrusts on 
athletic performance do not deserve further 
investigation, including new and more varied 
training protocols and loading intensities. 
In summary, the current state of the 
literature, as well as the preferences and 
perceptions of Olympic sprint and jump coaches, 
allow us to encourage coaches and practitioners 
from various sports to incorporate hip thrusts into 
their regular training routines, if possible, using 
light-to-moderate or moderate loading conditions. 
As emphasized, this exercise appears to be more 
effective and yields superior results when 
combined with different types or forms of exercises 
(e.g., squats, jump squats, plyometrics, etc.) (Abade 
et al., 2021; Freitas et al., 2023; Ribeiro et al., 2019). 
When used within these guidelines, this practical  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
201 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
exercise can serve as a suitable and effective  
stimulus for inducing positive adaptations in 
sprint performance. 
Lunge  
In general, the alternate forward lunge is a 
unilateral leg exercise involving substantial knee 
and hip extensor activity (Jakobsen et al., 2012). 
Nonetheless, there are many variations to this 
exercise that could fit into any training program 
and become a bilateral exercise (e.g., a stationary 
lunge). It can be performed with barbells, Smith 
machines, dumbbells or even kettlebells. In the 
ballistic lunge, a previous study (Jönhagen et al., 
2009) showed that the high-velocity jumping 
forward lunge was associated with higher 
electromyographic activity in the rectus femoris, 
biceps 
femoris, 
and 
lateral 
gastrocnemius 
compared with its walking version. Similarly, side 
and forward lunges have been shown to activate 
the gluteus maximus (Neto et al., 2020) and gluteus 
medius (Stastny et al., 2015), which are important 
muscles for controlling the frontal plane motion of 
the pelvis-hip complex. Consequently, different 
variations in the lunge exercise may provide 
distinct adaptations that will affect performance 
differently. For example, ballistic lunges will 
modify the kinetic and kinematic variables (e.g., 
peak forces, peak power, peak velocity) while 
possibly reducing the strength deficit associated 
with this variation, compared to the stationary 
lunge (Loturco et al., 2023d, 2023e). The latter 
differences were also observed when comparing 
two variations of the same exercise: a half squat 
and a jump squat. Recently, as mentioned above, 
Loturco et al. (2023d) reported that the ballistic 
version of the squat (i.e., a jump squat) exhibited 
higher peak force, power, and velocity which were 
associated with a reduced strength deficit 
compared to the traditional half squat performed 
across a comprehensive range of loads (i.e., 20–80% 
1RM). In another very recent study (Loturco et al., 
2023e), elite youth soccer players who performed a 
ballistic training program (i.e., jump squats + lunge 
hops) during a 4-week off-season period (between 
two consecutive seasons) demonstrated, at the 
individual level, superior gains in lower-body 
power compared to a traditional resistance 
training program comprising only non-ballistic 
squats and hops. Hence, given the importance of 
reducing the strength deficit for improving athletic  
 
 
performance, especially in terms of sprint speed  
and muscle power (Loturco et al., 2021c; Zabaloy et 
al., 2022a), practitioners may consider these 
practical applications and potential advantages 
when deciding which lunge variations to include 
in their training programs.  
Previous research involving Brazilian 
Olympic sprint and jump coaches revealed that 
only a minority (n = 2; < 11%) included lunges in 
their lists of the five most important resistance 
exercises (Loturco et al., 2023b). This suggests that 
the lunge is not a prioritized exercise; however, this 
does not necessarily mean it is entirely excluded or 
disregarded in the training process. Similar 
findings were observed in soccer (Loturco et al., 
2022a), where authors noted that lunges appeared 
four times among the four most common types of 
exercise within the five selected coaching ranks. 
Conversely, strength and conditioning coaches in 
rugby (none of whom mentioned this exercise) 
(Zabaloy et al., 2022b) or cricket (~6% of the 
coaches) (Weldon et al., 2021a) do not seem to 
prioritize, or even include, lunges in their 
resistance training programs. Prescribing training 
loads may be a challenging task for coaches when 
utilizing lunges and their variations, which could 
be one of the reasons that explain the low 
percentage 
of 
practitioners 
prioritizing 
the 
inclusion of this exercise. Nonetheless, authors 
have previously reported that results obtained 
from squat testing can provide useful data for 
determining loads for other exercises, such as 
lunges or step-ups (Ebben et al., 2008a). Another 
study, conducted with untrained participants, 
reported that ballistic lunge exercises performed 
with moderate loads (~65% RM) showed higher 
levels of leg muscle activity, of similar or greater 
magnitude when compared to using heavy-load 
lunges executed at slower (and controlled) 
velocities (Jakobsen et al., 2012). In contrast, 
performing 
lunges 
under 
heavier 
loading 
conditions (i.e., 80% 1RM) may provide a different 
stimulus and assist in the process of achieving 
greater increases in maximum strength, primarily 
attributed to both muscle and neural adaptations 
(Duchateau et al., 2021). Thus, despite its relatively 
low prevalence in both track and field disciplines 
and other sports, practitioners should always 
remember that the lunge is a simple and useful 
exercise, which can be performed using a variety of 
equipment, such as dumbbells, barbells, the Smith  
 

202  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
machine, etc., and under different loading  
conditions (i.e., light, moderate or heavy) and 
execution modes (i.e., ballistic and non-ballistic 
versions). Coaches should take into account the 
beneficial characteristics of this exercise when 
designing resistance training programs for elite 
athletes. 
Calf Raises  
The calf raise exercise was reported to be 
used by 15% of Olympic Brazilian sprint and jump 
coaches (Table 2). Because of the nature of this 
exercise (i.e., a single-joint movement), coaches 
usually prescribe calf raises during the preparatory 
period (i.e., a general training phase) of the season 
or during the rehabilitation process after injuries or 
chronic pain, to promote muscle strengthening, 
hypertrophy (i.e., morphological changes), and 
reduce bilateral imbalances (responses collected 
from open-ended questions; Loturco et al., 2023b). 
Calf raises are mostly used during the preparatory 
period since, during this training phase, coaches 
aim to develop a more general strength adaptation, 
preparing isolated joints and muscle groups for the 
later (and more complex) stages of the season, 
when exercises with higher mechanical stress, 
impact forces, and technical complexity are 
implemented. Indeed, considering that during 
plyometrics and form running exercises (e.g., 
hurdle jumps and skipping) the gastrocnemius and 
soleus muscles are highly activated (Ebben et al., 
2008b; Roelker et al., 2022), sprint and jump 
coaches opt to stimulate the joint/muscle groups 
involved in calf raises, using an integrative 
approach in periods close to competitions by 
prescribing predominantly technical drills (i.e., 
form running) and low-intensity plyometrics. This 
strategy may also be followed by practitioners 
from other sports, as during various sport-speciﬁc 
activities, the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles 
are highly engaged in concentric and eccentric 
actions, such as those involving sprinting and 
jumping tasks (Brazier et al., 2014; Pandy et al., 
2021). 
Core Exercises 
Core exercises are not ranked among the 
most important ones by Brazilian Olympic sprint 
and jump coaches (Loturco et al., 2023b). 
Nevertheless, these exercises seem to play a 
specific role within the programming of these  
 
 
highly specialized practitioners. According to  
Kibler et al. (2006), “core” is a term typically used 
to refer to the trunk muscles as a whole, but it 
specifically includes the abdominal, back, pelvic 
floor, diaphragm, hip and gluteus muscles. Their 
main functions are to: (1) establish an effective 
connection between the upper and the lower body; 
(2) generate and transfer forces from the proximal 
areas of the body to the distal parts during daily 
and sport activities; and (3) stabilize the spine and 
the pelvis (Kibler et al., 2006). In recent years, 
different studies have concluded that core and 
trunk muscle training might result in significant 
improvements 
in 
measures 
of 
athletic 
performance, 
such 
as 
maximum 
strength, 
muscular endurance, balance, linear sprint speed, 
vertical jump height, and COD speed and agility 
capabilities 
(Rodríguez-Perea 
et 
al., 
2023; 
Saeterbakken et al., 2022) as well as lumbo-pelvic 
control (Leong, 2024; Mendiguchia et al., 2021; 
Mills et al., 2005). Additionally, sport-specific 
performance (e.g., throwing velocity in handball or 
driving distance in golf) seems to be positively 
influenced by core training (Rodríguez-Perea et al., 
2023; Saeterbakken et al., 2022).  
The inclusion of trunk muscle and core 
training can be advantageous for sprinters and 
jumpers 
from 
a 
performance 
perspective 
(Rodríguez-Perea et al., 2023; Saeterbakken et al., 
2022), but also from an injury prevention point of 
view, given that altered lumbo-pelvic control has 
been suggested as a potential risk factor for 
hamstring strains (Mendiguchia et al., 2017) and 
upper-body injuries (Laudner et al., 2021). 
However, a common concern among practitioners 
is whether these specific exercises should be 
performed in isolation (i.e., in separate workouts) 
or in combination with other types of exercise (e.g., 
in sessions with plyometrics or upper- or lower-
body lifts) to optimize their effectiveness. In this 
regard, Rodríguez-Perea et al. (2023) analyzed the 
pooled effects of interventions consisting of 
isolated and combined core training routines and 
concluded that both approaches could be used to 
improve balance (i.e., isolated: standardized mean 
differences (SMD) = 0.67; combined: SMD = 1.67), 
throwing/hitting velocity (i.e., isolated: SMD = 
0.52; combined: SMD = 1.67) and jumping ability 
(isolated: SMD = 1.01; combined: SMD = 0.86). 
From an applied perspective, this indicates that 
practitioners may choose to implement their core  
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
203 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
training routines in separate sessions or combine  
them with strength-power exercises or sport-
specific activities, according to their particular 
contexts.  
 
An aspect that stands out when critically 
analyzing the available literature on core training 
is that session duration has been identified as a 
potential moderating factor for improvements in 
strength, linear sprint speed, and COD speed 
(Saeterbakken et al., 2022). Specifically, shorter 
session duration (i.e., ≤ 30 min) seems to result in 
significantly greater gains in the mentioned 
physical performance variables when compared to 
sessions longer than 30 min (Saeterbakken et al., 
2022). For example, Brull-Muria and Beltran-
Garrido (2021) reported that performing a 20-min 
core training session before soccer practice, twice 
per week for eight weeks, resulted in significantly 
faster 10-m sprint and V-Cut (i.e., a specific COD 
task) completion times in a group of youth players. 
This finding may have important implications for 
sports in which the time available for strength and 
conditioning practices is limited (e.g., team-sports), 
since it appears that, even with short session 
duration (e.g., 15–20 min), significant benefits can 
be obtained from core training. 
To summarize, the literature on trunk 
muscle and core strengthening and stabilization 
training strategies suggests that core exercises 
contribute to enhanced athletic performance and 
likely reduce the risk of injury. In addition, from a 
programming standpoint, coaches can be flexible 
with their exercise prescription because: (1) core 
exercises are effective when performed in isolation 
(i.e., in separate training sessions) or combined 
with other training strategies (e.g., plyometric or 
strength-power exercises); and (2) shorter session 
duration (i.e., ≤ 30 min) may be superior for 
adaptations following core training, encouraging 
its application in time-constrained contexts. 
Leg Curl and Leg Extension  
Leg curl and leg extension are the least 
frequently utilized exercises by Brazilian Olympic 
sprint and jump coaches (i.e., in conjunction with 
stiﬀ-leg deadlift) (Table 2). These exercises are 
typically incorporated into resistance training 
routines as complementary exercises, for injury 
prevention, or during rehabilitation processes after 
muscle and joint injuries or surgical procedures 
(responses collected from open-ended questions;  
 
 
Loturco et al., 2023b). Considering that leg curl and  
leg extension are open chain exercises, it can be 
argued that their transfer to sport-speciﬁc 
movements (i.e., linear sprints and jumps) may be 
more limited compared to exercises executed in 
closed chain conditions (e.g., squats and deadlifts). 
This limitation stems from the weak relationships 
observed between jump and sprint performance 
and the muscle activation patterns in these 
exercises (Augustsson et al., 1998; Blackburn and 
Morrissey, 1998; Requena et al., 2009; Signorile et 
al., 1994). To some extent, this justiﬁes the low 
frequency of use of these exercises by elite sprint 
and jump coaches in their training routines. 
 
Another common application of leg curl 
and leg extension exercises is during isokinetic 
strength testing aimed at detecting muscle (or 
movement) imbalances and assessing injury risk 
(Deli et al., 2011; Housh et al., 1984; Yeung et al., 
2009). To minimize these imbalances and mitigate 
the risk of injuries, these exercises are frequently 
incorporated into rehabilitation processes and 
preventive routines. For example, a 12-week 
intervention involving leg curl and leg extension 
exercises signiﬁcantly reduced the knee pain scores 
of athletes from diﬀerent sports disciplines 
(Cannell et al., 2001). Additionally, a resistance 
training program involving leg curl and leg 
extension exercises demonstrated eﬀectiveness in 
reducing 
hamstring-to-quadriceps 
ratio 
imbalances after a 6-week intervention in well-
trained soccer players (Śliwowski et al., 2015). 
Consequently, when the training goal is to assess 
and reduce muscular imbalances and facilitate a 
safe return to sports after an injury, these exercises 
are more commonly included in the resistance 
training routines of elite athletes. Moreover, the leg 
curl exercise is speciﬁcally implemented to 
increase hamstring strength, thereby reducing the 
injury risk associated with this muscle group 
(response collected from open-ended questions; 
Loturco et al., 2023b), a concern frequently 
reported by elite sprinters (Edouard et al., 2023). 
Indeed, several studies have integrated this 
exercise in hamstring injury prevention programs 
for athletes across various sports and training 
backgrounds (Bourne et al., 2018; Potier et al., 2009; 
Tous-Fajardo et al., 2006). Although leg curl and 
leg extension exercises are less frequently 
prescribed in the resistance training programs of 
elite athletes compared to more traditional and  
 

204  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
 
complex exercises (i.e., squats and Olympic  
weightlifting), they may be relevant in speciﬁc 
situations where athletes, under certain conditions, 
can beneﬁt from their inclusion.  
Stiff-Leg Deadlift 
The deadlift is a multi-joint exercise that 
can be divided into dynamic variations (e.g., a 
conventional or a sumo deadlift) or static-knee 
variations (e.g., a Romanian or a stiff-leg deadlift). 
In its dynamic variations, the knees perform 
flexion-extension, while in static-knee variations, 
the knees maintain a constant angle throughout the 
entire exercise (Coratella et al., 2022; Martín-
Fuentes et al., 2020). Specifically, the stiff-leg 
deadlift (SLD) is performed with the knees 
extended throughout the entire range of motion 
(Coratella et al., 2022), indicating that the SLD is a 
predominantly hip-dominant variation exercise. 
This is a crucial aspect, as previous reports have 
highlighted the high electromyographic activity of 
the hamstring muscles during the SLD compared 
to other exercises (e.g., squats). For example, it was 
reported that the SLD involved the hamstrings to a 
higher degree than the back squat which exhibited 
only about half as much hamstring-integrated 
electromyography when compared to the SLD 
(Wright et al., 1999). Similarly, movements that 
emphasize hip extension, such as the SLD, appear 
to preferentially activate the biceps femoris long 
head, precisely the knee flexor muscle most 
commonly injured (i.e., affected or re-injured) 
(Marchiori et al., 2022; Opar et al., 2012). 
Consequently, it seems reasonable to consider the 
SLD as an important and valuable addition to any 
resistance training program, regardless of the sport 
discipline. 
Curiously, only 5% of Brazilian Olympic 
sprint and jump coaches reported incorporating 
the SLD exercise into their resistance training 
routines (Loturco et al., 2023b). The low percentage 
of SLD usage is somewhat surprising, particularly 
considering the importance of hamstring muscles 
for sprinting performance (Zabaloy et al., 2023) 
and hamstring strain injury prevention programs 
(Bramah et al., 2023). For comparison purposes, a 
survey with Brazilian elite soccer strength and 
conditioning coaches revealed that Nordic curls, 
leg curls, and the SLD appear twice among the four 
most common types of exercises within the five 
main ranks of strength-power exercises prepared  
 
 
and prescribed by these coaches (Loturco et al.,  
2022a). In contrast, in amateur rugby (Zabaloy et 
al., 2022b), coaches reported not using either the 
SLD or any deadlift variations with their athletes. 
Overall, regardless of the sport, coaches and 
practitioners should consider the SLD as an 
important complimentary exercise. Instead of 
targeting a specific muscle region (e.g., the biceps 
femoris long head), it should be implemented as a 
pulling exercise variation to improve lower limb 
strength and power production, focused on 
promoting positive adaptations and increasing 
recruitment of posterior chain muscles (Coratella 
et al., 2022; Marchiori et al., 2022; Martín-Fuentes 
et al., 2020). In this sense, recent research 
demonstrated that the inclusion of the SLD in 
systematic resistance training programs induced 
increases in hamstring concentric strength and 
jump performance in rugby players (which can 
also benefit athletes from other sports) (Marchiori 
et al., 2022). Practitioners working in different 
areas and with different purposes (i.e., athletic 
performance or rehabilitation) may consider 
regularly incorporating this practical pulling 
exercise into their training schemes. 
Conclusions  
Resistance training is unquestionably one 
of the primary and most commonly implemented 
strategies to enhance speed- and jump-related 
performance in numerous sports, regardless of age 
categories 
and 
training 
backgrounds. 
Undoubtedly, the methods and exercises used by 
coaches and practitioners vary according to their 
objectives, viewpoints, and most importantly, to 
the needs and demands of their athletes. In this 
extensive study, we present the resistance training 
practices adopted by coaches highly specialized in 
developing fast and powerful athletes (i.e., 
Olympic sprint and jump coaches). We firmly 
believe that this knowledge can assist practitioners 
from various sports in designing better and more 
sport-specific 
resistance 
training 
programs, 
particularly those aimed at optimizing sprint and 
jump qualities in elite athletes. The wide variety of 
topics and details provided here prevents us from 
objectively summarizing any general information 
concerning a specific resistance training method or 
exercise. On the other hand, the consistency and 
significance of these concepts and observations 
allow us to assert definitively: when well- 
 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
205 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
 
programmed and prescribed, resistance training 
programs can be one of the most important (or  
perhaps the most important) allies in the 
development of more efficient and well-trained  
 
athletes. In addition, in essence, these precepts and 
principles can be applied to any sport, whether it is 
individual or collective (i.e., team-sports). 
 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: I.L., S.Z., L.A.P., T.B.M.A.M., V.P.M., V.F., A.Z., A.M., T.T.F. and 
C.B.; methodology: I.L., L.A.P. and C.B.; software: I.L. and L.A.P.; validation: I.L., L.A.P. and C.B.; formal 
analysis: I.L. and L.A.P.; investigation: I.L., L.A.P., T.B.M.A.M. and V.F.; resources: I.L. and L.A.P.; data 
curation: I.L. and L.A.P.; writing—original draft preparation: I.L.; writing—review & editing: I.L., S.Z., L.A.P. 
and T.T.F.; visualization: I.L., S.Z., L.A.P., T.B.M.A.M., V.P.M., V.F., A.Z., A.M., T.T.F. and C.B.; supervision: 
I.L.; project administration: I.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.  
 
ORCID iD: 
Irineu Loturco: 0000-0003-1309-2568 ; Santiago Zabaloy: 0000-0002-5408-5682; Lucas A. Pereira: 0000-0003-
1079-2446; Túlio B. M. A. Moura: 0000-0003-4601-5710; Valter P. Mercer: 0000-0003-2976-6053; Adam Zając: 
0000-0002-4374-4822; Aleksander Matusinski: 0000-0001-8698-7026; Tomás T. Freitas: 0000-0001-8571-3189; 
Chris Bishop: 0000-0002-1505-1287  
Funding Information: This research received no external funding. 
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. 
Informed Consent:  Not applicable. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Received: 02 January 2024 
Accepted: 20 January 2024 
 
References 
Abade, E., Silva, N., Ferreira, R., Baptista, J., Gonçalves, B., Osório, S., & Viana, J. (2021). Effects of adding 
vertical or horizontal force-vector exercises to in-season general strength training on jumping and 
sprinting performance of youth football players. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 35(10), 
2769–2774. 
Aboodarda, S. J., Hamid, M. S. A., Che Muhamed, A. M., Ibrahim, F., & Thompson, M. (2013). Resultant muscle 
torque and electromyographic activity during high intensity elastic resistance and free weight 
exercises. European Journal of Sport Science, 13(2), 155–163. 
Agudo-Ortega, A., Salinero, J. J., Sandbakk, Ø., De La Cruz, V. M., & González-Rave, J. M. (2023). Training 
practices used by elite sprint coaches. International Journal of Performance Analysis in Sport, In Press, 1–
16. 
Alonso-Fernandez, D., Docampo-Blanco, P., & Martinez-Fernandez, J. (2017). Changes in muscle architecture 
of biceps femoris induced by eccentric strength training with nordic hamstring exercise. Scandinavian 
Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 28(1), 88–94. 
Andersen, V., Fimland, M., Kolnes, M., & Saeterbakken, A. (2015). Elastic Bands in Combination With Free 
Weights in Strength Training: Neuromuscular Effects. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 
29(10), 2932–2940. 
Andersen, V., Fimland, M., Mo, D., Iversen, V., Vederhus, T., Lr, R. H., Nordaune, K., & Saeterbakken, A. 
(2018). Electromyographic Comparison of Barbell Deadlift, Hex Bar Deadlift, and Hip Thrust 
Exercises: A Cross-Over Study. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 32(3), 587–593. 
Anderson, C., Sforzo, G., & Sigg, J. (2008). The effects of combining elastic and free weight resistance on 
strength and power in athletes. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 22(2), 567–574. 

206  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
Augustsson, J., Esko, A., Thomeé, R., & Svantesson, U. (1998). Weight training of the thigh muscles using 
closed versus open kinetic chain exercises: a comparison of performance enhancement. Journal of 
Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy, 27(1), 3–8. 
Beato, M. (2020). Implementing Flywheel (Isoinertial) Exercise in Strength Training: Current Evidence, 
Practical Recommendations, and Future Directions. Frontiers in physiology, 11, 569. 
Beato, M., Mcerlain-Naylor, S., & Halperin, I. (2019). Current Evidence and Practical Applications of Flywheel 
Eccentric Overload Exercises as Postactivation Potentiation Protocols: A Brief Review. International 
Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 15(2), 154–161. 
Behm, D., & Sale, D. (1993). Velocity specificity of resistance training. Sports Medicine, 15(6), 374–388. 
Berton, R., Silva, D. D. D., Santos, M. L. D., Silva, C. M. P. E., & Tricoli, V. (2022). Weightlifting derivatives vs. 
plyometric exercises: Effects on unloaded and loaded vertical jumps and sprint performance. PloS One, 
17(9), e0274962. 
Bimson, L., Langdown, L., Fisher, J. P., & Steele, J. (2017). Six weeks of knee extensor isometric training 
improves soccer related skills in female soccer players. Journal of Trainology, 6(2), 52–56. 
Blackburn, J. R., & Morrissey, M. C. (1998). The relationship between open and closed kinetic chain strength 
of the lower limb and jumping performance. Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy, 27(6), 430–
435. 
Blazevich, A. J., & Babault, N. (2019). Post-activation potentiation versus post-activation performance 
enhancement in humans: historical perspective, underlying mechanisms, and current issues. Frontiers 
in Physiology, 10, 1359. 
Bloomquist, K., Langberg, H., Karlsen, S., Madsgaard, S., Boesen, M., & Raastad, T. (2013). Effect of range of 
motion in heavy load squatting on muscle and tendon adaptations. European Journal of Applied 
Physiology, 113(8), 2133–2142. 
Bolger, R., Lyons, M., Harrison, A. J., & Kenny, I. C. (2016). Coaching sprinting: Expert coaches’ perception of 
resistance-based training. International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching, 11(5), 746–754. 
Bourne, M., Timmins, R., Opar, D., Pizzari, T., Ruddy, J., Sims, C., Williams, M., & Shield, A. (2018). An 
Evidence-Based Framework for Strengthening Exercises to Prevent Hamstring Injury. Sports Medicine, 
48(2), 251–267. 
Boyd, L., Deakin, G. B., Devantier-Thomas, B., Singh, U., & Doma, K. (2023). The Effects of Pre-conditioning 
on Exercise-Induced Muscle Damage: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Sports Medicine, 53(8), 
1537–1557. 
Bramah, C., Mendiguchia, J., Dos’ Santos, T., & Morin, J.-B. (2023). Exploring the role of sprint biomechanics 
in hamstring strain injuries: a current opinion on existing concepts and evidence. Sports Medicine, In 
Press, 1–11. 
Brazier, J., Bishop, C., Simons, C., Antrobus, M., Read, P. J., & Turner, A. N. (2014). Lower extremity stiffness: 
Effects on performance and injury and implications for training. Strength & Conditioning Journal, 36(5), 
103–112. 
Brull-Muria, E., & Beltran-Garrido, J. V. (2021). Effects of a specific core stability program on the sprint and 
change-of-direction maneuverability performance in youth, male soccer players. International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(19), 10116. 
Bryanton, M., Kennedy, M., Carey, J., & Chiu, L. (2012). Effect of squat depth and barbell load on relative 
muscular effort in squatting. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 26(10), 2820–2828. 
Cannell, L., Taunton, J., Clement, D., Smith, C., & Khan, K. (2001). A randomised clinical trial of the efficacy 
of drop squats or leg extension/leg curl exercises to treat clinically diagnosed jumper's knee in athletes: 
pilot study. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 35(1), 60–64. 
Caterisano, A., Moss, R., Pellinger, T., Woodruff, K., Lewis, V., Booth, W., & Khadra, T. (2002). The effect of 
back squat depth on the EMG activity of 4 superficial hip and thigh muscles. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, 16(3), 428–432. 
Chaabene, H., Prieske, O., Negra, Y., & Granacher, U. (2018). Change of direction speed: Toward a strength 
training approach with accentuated eccentric muscle actions. Sports Medicine, 48(8), 1773–1779. 
Cissik, J. M. (2010). Strength and conditioning considerations for the 100-m sprinter. Strength & Conditioning 
Journal, 32(6), 89–94. 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
207 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
Comfort, P., Haff, G., Suchomel, T., Soriano, M., Pierce, K., Hornsby, W., Haff, E., Sommerfield, L., Chavda, S., 
& Morris, S. (2023). National Strength and Conditioning Association Position Statement on 
Weightlifting for Sports Performance. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 37(6), 1163–1190. 
Contreras, B., Cronin, J., & Schoenfeld, B. (2011). Barbell hip thrust. Strength & Conditioning Journal, 33(5), 58–
61. 
Contreras, B., Vigotsky, A., Schoenfeld, B., Beardsley, C., & Cronin, J. (2015). A Comparison of Gluteus 
Maximus, Biceps Femoris, and Vastus Lateralis Electromyography Amplitude in the Parallel, Full, and 
Front Squat Variations in Resistance-Trained Females. Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 32(1), 16–22. 
Contreras, B., Vigotsky, A. D., Schoenfeld, B. J., Beardsley, C., Mcmaster, D. T., Reyneke, J. H., & Cronin, J. B. 
(2017). Effects of a six-week hip thrust vs. front squat resistance training program on performance in 
adolescent males: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 31(4), 
999–1008. 
Coratella, G., Tornatore, G., Longo, S., Esposito, F., & Cè, E. (2022). An electromyographic analysis of 
Romanian, step-Romanian, and stiff-leg deadlift: Implication for resistance training. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(3), 1903. 
Cormie, P., Mcguigan, M., & Newton, R. (2011). Developing maximal neuromuscular power: part 2-training 
considerations for improving maximal power production. Sports Medicine, 41(2), 125–146. 
Cormier, P., Freitas, T., Rubio-Arias, J., & Alcaraz, P. (2020). Complex and Contrast Training: Does Strength 
and Power Training Sequence Affect Performance-Based Adaptations in Team Sports? A Systematic 
Review and Meta-analysis. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 34(5), 1461–1479. 
Cormier, P., Freitas, T. T., Loturco, I., Turner, A., Virgile, A., Haff, G. G., Blazevich, A. J., Agar-Newman, D., 
Henneberry, M., & Baker, D. G. (2022). Within session exercise sequencing during programming for 
complex training: historical perspectives, terminology, and training considerations. Sports Medicine, 
52(10), 2371–2389. 
Cormier, P., Freitas, T. T., & Seaman, K. (2021). A systematic review of resistance training methodologies for 
the development of lower body concentric mean power, peak power, and mean propulsive power in 
team-sport athletes. Sports Biomechanics, In Press, 1–34. 
Crenshaw, K., Zeppieri, G., Hung, C.-J., Schmitfranz, T., Mccall, P., Castellini, G., Gianola, S., & Pozzi, F. (2023). 
Olympic Weight Training for Sprint Performance: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis. 
International Journal of Sports Medicine, In Press. 
Cronin, J., Mcnair, P. J., & Marshall, R. N. (2001). Developing explosive power: a comparison of technique and 
training. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 4(1), 59–70. 
Cuenca-Fernández, F., Smith, I. C., Jordan, M. J., Macintosh, B. R., López-Contreras, G., Arellano, R., & Herzog, 
W. (2017). Nonlocalized postactivation performance enhancement (PAPE) effects in trained athletes: 
a pilot study. Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 42(10), 1122–1125. 
De Hoyo, M., Pozzo, M., Sañudo, B., Carrasco, L., Gonzalo-Skok, O., Domínguez-Cobo, S., & Morán-Camacho, 
E. (2014). Effects of a 10-week in-season eccentric-overload training program on muscle-injury 
prevention and performance in junior elite soccer players. International Journal of Sports Physiology and 
Performance, 10(1), 46–52. 
De La Cruz, V. M., Agudo-Ortega, A., Sorgente, V., Turner, A., & González-Ravé, J. (2023). The effectiveness 
of adjusting resistance training loads through velocity-based techniques in experienced sprinters: a 
case series study. Frontiers in Physiology, 14, 1241459. 
Deli, C., Paschalis, V., Theodorou, A., Nikolaidis, M., Jamurtas, A., & Koutedakis, Y. (2011). Isokinetic knee 
joint evaluation in track and field events. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 25(9), 2528–2536. 
Dello Iacono, A., Padulo, J., & Seitz, L. B. (2018). Hip thrust-based PAP effects on sprint performance of soccer 
players: heavy-loaded versus optimum-power development protocols. Journal of Sports Sciences, 
36(20), 2375–2382. 
Dello Iacono, A., Padulo, J., & Seitz, L. D. (2017). Loaded hip thrust-based PAP protocol effects on acceleration 
and sprint performance of handball players. Journal of Sports Sciences, 36(11), 1269–1276. 
Deweese, B. H., Hornsby, G., Stone, M., & Stone, M. H. (2015). The training process: Planning for strength–
power training in track and field. Part 1: Theoretical aspects. Journal of Sport and Health Science, 4(4), 
308–317. 

208  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
Dos’ Santos, T., Thomas, C., Comfort, P., & Jones, P. A. (2018). The effect of angle and velocity on change of 
direction biomechanics: An angle-velocity trade-off. Sports Medicine, 48(10), 2235–2253. 
Douglas, J., Pearson, S., Ross, A., & Mcguigan, M. (2017a). Eccentric Exercise: Physiological Characteristics and 
Acute Responses. Sports Medicine, 47(4), 663–675. 
Douglas, J., Pearson, S., Ross, A., & Mcguigan, M. (2017b). Chronic adaptations to eccentric training: a 
systematic review. Sports Medicine, 47(5), 917–941. 
Dowse, R. A., Mcguigan, M. R., & Harrison, C. (2020). Effects of a Resistance Training Intervention on Strength, 
Power, and Performance in Adolescent Dancers. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 34(12), 
3446–3453. 
Duchateau, J., Stragier, S., Baudry, S., & Carpentier, A. (2021). Strength Training: In Search of Optimal 
Strategies to Maximize Neuromuscular Performance. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 49(1), 2–14. 
Ebben, W., Carroll, R., & Simenz, C. (2004). Strength and conditioning practices of National Hockey League 
strength and conditioning coaches. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 18(4), 889–897. 
Ebben, W., Feldmann, C., Dayne, A., Mitsche, D., Chmielewski, L., Alexander, P., & Knetgzer, K. (2008a). Using 
squat testing to predict training loads for the deadlift, lunge, step-up, and leg extension exercises. 
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 22(6), 1947–1949. 
Ebben, W., Simenz, C., & Jensen, R. (2008b). Evaluation of plyometric intensity using electromyography. 
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 22(3), 861–868. 
Edouard, P., Caumeil, B., Giroux, C., Bruneau, A., Tondut, J., Navarro, L., Hanon, C., Guilhem, G., & Ruffault, 
A. (2023). Epidemiology of Injury Complaints in Elite Sprinting Athletes in Athletics (Track and Field). 
Applied Sciences, 13(14), 8105. 
Freitas, T. T., Martinez-Rodriguez, A., Calleja-Gonzalez, J., & Alcaraz, P. E. (2017). Short-term adaptations 
following complex training in team-sports: A meta-analysis. PloS One, 12(6), e0180223. 
Freitas, T. T., Pereira, L. A., Alcaraz, P. E., Azevedo, P. H., Zanetti, V., Pantarotto, N. B., Reis, V. P., Jeffreys, I., 
& Loturco, I. (2023). Mixed Training Programs Applied to Young Soccer Players: Effects on Speed-
Power Abilities. International Journal of Sports Medicine, 44(14), 1049–1058. 
Garner, J. C., Blackburn, T., Weimar, W., & Campbell, B. (2008). Comparison of electromyographic activity 
during eccentrically versus concentrically loaded isometric contractions. Journal of Electromyography 
and Kinesiology, 18(3), 466–471. 
Gérard, R., Gojon, L., Decleve, P., & Van Cant, J. (2020). The effects of eccentric training on biceps femoris 
architecture and strength: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Journal of Athletic Training, 55(5), 
501–514. 
González-Badillo, J. J., Sánchez-Medina, L., Pareja-Blanco, F., & Rodríguez-Rosell, D. (2017). The strength 
deficit concept. In J. J. González-Badillo, L. Sánchez-Medina, F. Pareja-Blanco, & D. Rodríguez-Rosell 
(Eds.), Fundamentals of Velocity-Based Resistance Training (pp. 110-111). Murcia, Spain: Ergotech.  
Goodin, J. R. (2015). Comparison of external kinetic and kinematic variables between high barbell back squats and low 
barbell back squats across a range of loads. East Tennessee State University (Thesis). 
https://dc.etsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3919&context=etd (accessed on 27 November 2023) 
Gullett, J., Tillman, M., Gutierrez, G., & Chow, J. (2009). A biomechanical comparison of back and front squats 
in healthy trained individuals. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 23(1), 284–292. 
Guruhan, S., Kafa, N., Ecemis, Z. B., & Guzel, N. A. (2021). Muscle activation differences during eccentric 
hamstring exercises. Sports Health, 13(2), 181–186. 
Haff, G. G., & Nimphius, S. (2012). Training principles for power. Strength & Conditioning Journal, 34(6), 2–12. 
Haugen, M. E., Vårvik, F. T., Larsen, S., Haugen, A. S., Van Den Tillaar, R., & Bjørnsen, T. (2023). Effect of free-
weight vs. machine-based strength training on maximal strength, hypertrophy and jump 
performance–a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
15(1), 103. 
Haugen, T., Seiler, S., Sandbakk, Ø., & Tønnessen, E. (2019). The Training and Development of Elite Sprint 
Performance: an Integration of Scientific and Best Practice Literature. Sports Medicine-Open, 5(1), 44. 
Healy, R., Kenny, I. C., & Harrison, A. J. (2021). Resistance Training Practices of Sprint Coaches. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 35(7), 1939–1948. 
Hernández-Belmonte, A., Buendía-Romero, Á., Franco-López, F., Martínez-Cava, A., & Pallarés, J. (2023). 
Adaptations in athletic performance and muscle architecture are not meaningfully conditioned by 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
209 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
training free-weight versus machine-based exercises: Challenging a traditional assumption using the 
velocity-based method. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 33(10), 1948–1957. 
Housh, T. J., Thorland, W. G., Tharp, G. D., Johnson, G. O., & Cisar, C. J. (1984). Isokinetic leg flexion and 
extension strength of elite adolescent female track and field athletes. Research Quarterly for Exercise and 
Sport, 55(4), 347–350. 
Hunter, J., Marshall, R., & Mcnair, P. (2005). Relationships between ground reaction force impulse and 
kinematics of sprint-running acceleration. Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 21(1), 31–43. 
Issurin, V. (2013). Training transfer: scientific background and insights for practical application. Sports 
Medicine, 43(8), 675–694. 
Jakobsen, M., Sundstrup, E., Andersen, C., Aagaard, P., & Andersen, L. (2012). Muscle activity during leg 
strengthening exercise using free weights and elastic resistance: effects of ballistic vs controlled 
contractions. Human Movement Science, 32(1), 65–78. 
Jarvis, P., Cassone, N., Turner, A., Chavda, S., Edwards, M., & Bishop, C. (2019). Heavy Barbell Hip Thrusts 
Do Not Effect Sprint Performance: An 8-Week Randomized Controlled Study. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, 33, S78–S84. 
Jeffreys, I.(2013) Developing speed. Human Kinetics. 
Jones, T., Smith, A., Macnaughton, L., & French, D. (2016). Strength and Conditioning and Concurrent Training 
Practices in Elite Rugby Union. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 30(12), 3354–3366. 
Jönhagen, S., Halvorsen, K., & Benoit, D. (2009). Muscle activation and length changes during two lunge 
exercises: implications for rehabilitation. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 19(4), 561–
568. 
Joy, J., Lowery, R., Oliveira De Souza, E., & Wilson, J. (2016). Elastic Bands as a Component of Periodized 
Resistance Training. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 30(8), 2100–2106. 
Kaardal, T. (2019). Comparing the effects of different variants of the free weight barbell squat to machine-based squatting 
exercises: 
A 
systematic 
literature 
review. 
Norwegian 
School 
of 
Sport 
Sciences 
(Thesis). 
https://nih.brage.unit.no/nih-xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/2606823/Kaardal%20T%20v2019.pdf 
(accessed on 20 December 2023) 
Kenneally-Dabrowski, C. J., Brown, N. A., Lai, A. K., Perriman, D., Spratford, W., & Serpell, B. G. (2019). Late 
swing or early stance? A narrative review of hamstring injury mechanisms during high-speed 
running. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 29(8), 1083–1091. 
Kibler, W. B., Press, J., & Sciascia, A. (2006). The role of core stability in athletic function. Sports Medicine, 36(3), 
189–199. 
Kraemer, W., & Newton, R. (2000). Training for muscular power. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of 
North America, 11(2), 341–368. 
Križaj, L., Kozinc, Ž., Löfler, S., & Šarabon, N. (2022). The chronic effects of eccentric exercise interventions in 
different populations: an umbrella review. European Journal of Translational Myology, 32(4), 10876. 
Kubo, K., Ohgo, K., Takeishi, R., Yoshinaga, K., Tsunoda, N., Kanehisa, H., & Fukunaga, T. (2006). Effects of 
isometric training at different knee angles on the muscle-tendon complex in vivo. Scandinavian Journal 
of Medicine & Science in Sports, 16(3), 159–167. 
Kubo, T., Hirayama, K., Nakamura, N., & Higuchi, M. (2018). Effect of accommodating elastic bands on 
mechanical power output during back squats. Sports, 6(4), 151. 
Lanza, M. B., Balshaw, T. G., & Folland, J. P. (2019). Is the joint-angle specificity of isometric resistance training 
real? And if so, does it have a neural basis? European Journal of Applied Physiology, 119, 2465–2476. 
Larsen, S., Kristiansen, E., & Van Den Tillaar, R. (2021). New insights about the sticking region in back squats: 
an analysis of kinematics, kinetics, and myoelectric activity. Frontiers in Sports and Active Living, 3, 
691459. 
Laudner, K., Wong, R., Evans, D., & Meister, K. (2021). Lumbopelvic control and the development of upper 
extremity injury in professional baseball pitchers. The American Journal of Sports Medicine, 49(4), 1059–
1064. 
Leong, C. H., Forsythe, C., Bohling, Z. (2024). Posterior chain and core training improves pelvic posture, 
hamstrings-to-quadriceps ratio, and vertical jump performance. Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical 
Fitness, 64(1), 7–15. 

210  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
Loturco, I., Contreras, B., Kobal, R., Fernandes, V., Moura, N., Siqueira, F., Winckler, C., Suchomel, T., & 
Pereira, L. A. (2018a). Vertically and horizontally directed muscle power exercises: Relationships with 
top-level sprint performance. PloS One, 13(7), e0201475. 
Loturco, I., Freitas, T. T., Alcaraz, P. E., Kobal, R., Nunes, R. F. H., Weldon, A., & Pereira, L. A. (2022a). Practices 
of strength and conditioning coaches in Brazilian elite soccer. Biology of Sport, 39(3), 779–791. 
Loturco, I., Freitas, T. T., Zabaloy, S., Pereira, L. A., Moura, T. B., Fernandes, V., Mercer, V. P., Alcaraz, P. E., 
Zając, A., & Bishop, C. (2023a). Speed Training Practices of Brazilian Olympic Sprint and Jump 
Coaches: Toward a Deeper Understanding of Their Choices and Insights (Part II). Journal of Human 
Kinetics, 89, 187–211. 
Loturco, I., Haugen, T., Freitas, T. T., Bishop, C., Moura, T. B., Mercer, V. P., Alcaraz, P. E., Pereira, L. A., & 
Weldon, A. (2023b). Strength and conditioning practices of Brazilian Olympic sprint and jump 
coaches. Journal of Human Kinetics, 86, 17–-194. 
Loturco, I., Mcguigan, M., Freitas, T. T., Nakamura, F., Boullosa, D., Valenzuela, P., Pereira, L. A., & Pareja-
Blanco, F. (2022b). Squat and countermovement jump performance across a range of loads: a 
comparison between Smith machine and free weight execution modes in elite sprinters. Biology of 
Sport, 39(4), 1043–1048. 
Loturco, I., Mcguigan, M., Freitas, T. T., Valenzuela, P., Pereira, L. A., & Pareja-Blanco, F. (2021a). Performance 
and reference data in the jump squat at different relative loads in elite sprinters, rugby players, and 
soccer players. Biology of Sport, 38(2), 219–227. 
Loturco, I., Mcguigan, M., Pereira, L. A., & Pareja-Blanco, F. (2023c). The load-velocity relationship in the jump 
squat exercise. Biology of Sport, 40(2), 611–614. 
Loturco, I., Mcguigan, M. R., Freitas, T. T., Bishop, C., Zabaloy, S., Mercer, V. P., Moura, T. B., Arruda, A. F., 
Ramos, M. S., & Pereira, L. A. (2023d). Half-Squat and Jump Squat Exercises Performed Across a Range 
of Loads: Differences in Mechanical Outputs and Strength Deficits. Journal of Strength and Conditioning 
Research, 37(5), 1052–1056. 
Loturco, I., Mcguigan, M. R., Rodríguez-Rosell, D., Pereira, L. A., & Pareja-Blanco, F. (2022c). A novel strategy 
to determine the 1-repetition maximum in the jump squat exercise. Journal of Strength and Conditioning 
Research, 36(8), 2330–2334. 
Loturco, I., Nunes, R., Lampert, R., Silva, R., Hespanhol, J., Novack, L., Conde, J., Pereira, L., & Mcguigan, M. 
(2023e). Effects of Two Different Low-Volume Resistance Training Programs Applied During the Off-
Season Period on the Speed-Power Performance of Elite Youth Soccer Players. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, In Press. 
Loturco, I., Pereira, L., Cc, C. A., Dʼangelo, R., Fernandes, V., Kitamura, K., Kobal, R., & Nakamura, F. (2015a). 
Vertical and Horizontal Jump Tests Are Strongly Associated With Competitive Performance in 100-m 
Dash Events. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 29(7), 1966–1971. 
Loturco, I., Pereira, L., Cc, C. A., Gil, S., Kitamura, K., Kobal, R., & Nakamura, F. (2015b). Using Bar Velocity 
to Predict the Maximum Dynamic Strength in the Half-Squat Exercise. International Journal of Sports 
Physiology and Performance, 11(5), 697–700. 
Loturco, I., Pereira, L., Kobal, R., Fernandes, V., Reis, V., Romano, F., Alves, M., Freitas, T., & Mcguigan, M. 
(2021b). Transference Effect of Short-Term Optimum Power Load Training on the Punching Impact of 
Elite Boxers. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 35(9), 2373–2378. 
Loturco, I., Pereira, L. A., Freitas, T. T., Bishop, C., Pareja-Blanco, F., & Mcguigan, M. R. (2021c). Maximum 
strength, relative strength, and strength deficit: relationships with performance and differences 
between elite sprinters and professional rugby union players. International Journal of Sports Physiology 
and Performance, 16(8), 1148–1153. 
Loturco, I., Pereira, L. A., Kobal, R., Maldonado, T., Piazzi, A. F., Bottino, A., Kitamura, K., Cal Abad, C. C., De 
Arruda, M., & Nakamura, F. Y. (2016). Improving sprint performance in soccer: effectiveness of jump 
squat and Olympic push press exercises. PloS One, 11(4), e0153958. 
Loturco, I., Pereira, L. A., Reis, V. P., Zanetti, V., Bishop, C., & Mcguigan, M. R. (2022d). Traditional Free-
Weight Vs. Variable Resistance Training Applied to Elite Young Soccer Players During a Short 
Preseason: Effects on Strength, Speed, and Power Performance. Journal of Strength & Conditioning 
Research, 36(12), 3432–3439. 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
211 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
Loturco, I., Suchomel, T., James, L. P., Bishop, C., Abad, C. C., Pereira, L. A., & Mcguigan, M. R. (2018b). 
Selective influences of maximum dynamic strength and bar-power output on team sports 
performance: a comprehensive study of four different disciplines. Frontiers in Physiology, 9, 1820. 
Lum, D., & Barbosa, T. (2019). Brief Review: Effects of Isometric Strength Training on Strength and Dynamic 
Performance. International Journal of Sports Medicine, 40(6), 363–375. 
Lum, D., Joseph, R., Ong, K. Y., Tang, J. M., & Suchomel, T. J. (2023). Comparing the Effects of Long-Term vs. 
Periodic Inclusion of Isometric Strength Training on Strength and Dynamic Performances. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 37(2), 305–314. 
Marchiori, C. L., Medeiros, D. M., Severo-Silveira, L., Dos Santos Oliveira, G., Medeiros, T. M., De Araujo 
Ribeiro-Alvares, J. B., & Baroni, B. M. (2022). Muscular adaptations to training programs using the 
Nordic hamstring exercise or the stiff-leg deadlift in rugby players. Sport Sciences for Health, 18(2), 415–
423. 
Maroto-Izquierdo, S., García-López, D., Fernandez-Gonzalo, R., Moreira, O., González-Gallego, J., & De Paz, 
J. (2017). Skeletal muscle functional and structural adaptations after eccentric overload flywheel 
resistance training: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 
20(10), 943–951. 
Marshall, J., Bishop, C., Turner, A., & Haff, G. (2021). Optimal Training Sequences to Develop Lower Body 
Force, Velocity, Power, and Jump Height: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis. Sports Medicine, 
51(6), 1245–1271. 
Martín-Fuentes, I., Oliva-Lozano, J. M., & Muyor, J. M. (2020). Electromyographic activity in deadlift exercise 
and its variants. A systematic review. PloS One, 15(2), e0229507. 
Martínez-Cava, A., Morán-Navarro, R., Sánchez-Medina, L., González-Badillo, J. J., & Pallarés, J. G. (2019). 
Velocity-and power-load relationships in the half, parallel and full back squat. Journal of Sports Sciences, 
37(10), 1088–1096. 
Mcbride, J., Triplett-Mcbride, T., Davie, A., & Newton, R. (2002). The effect of heavy-vs. light-load jump squats 
on the development of strength, power, and speed. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 16(1), 
75–82. 
Mcneill, C., Beaven, C. M., Mcmaster, D. T., & Gill, N. (2019). Eccentric training interventions and team sport 
athletes. Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology, 4(4), 67. 
Mendez-Rebolledo, G., Figueroa-Ureta, R., Moya-Mura, F., Guzmán-Muñoz, E., Ramirez-Campillo, R., & 
Lloyd, R. (2021). The Protective Effect of Neuromuscular Training on the Medial Tibial Stress 
Syndrome in Youth Female Track-and-Field Athletes: A Clinical Trial and Cohort Study. Journal of 
Sport Rehabilitation, 30(7), 1019–1027. 
Mendiguchia, J., Gonzalez De La Flor, A., Mendez-Villanueva, A., Morin, J.-B., Edouard, P., & Garrues, M. A. 
(2021). Training-induced changes in anterior pelvic tilt: potential implications for hamstring strain 
injuries management. Journal of Sports Sciences, 39(7), 760–767. 
Mendiguchia, J., Martinez-Ruiz, E., Edouard, P., Morin, J., Martinez-Martinez, F., Idoate, F., & Mendez-
Villanueva, A. (2017). A Multifactorial, Criteria-based Progressive Algorithm for Hamstring Injury 
Treatment. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 49(7), 1482–1492. 
Mills, J. D., Taunton, J. E., & Mills, W. A. (2005). The effect of a 10-week training regimen on lumbo-pelvic 
stability and athletic performance in female athletes: a randomized-controlled trial. Physical Therapy in 
Sport, 6(2), 60–66. 
Morris, S. J., Oliver, J. L., Pedley, J. S., Haff, G. G., & Lloyd, R. S. (2022). Comparison of weightlifting, traditional 
resistance training and plyometrics on strength, power and speed: a systematic review with meta-
analysis. Sports Medicine, 52(7), 1533–1554. 
Murton, J., Eager, R., & Drury, B. (2023). Comparison of flywheel versus traditional resistance training in elite 
academy male Rugby union players. Research in Sports Medicine, 31(3), 214–227. 
Neto, W., Soares, E., Vieira, T., Aguiar, R., Chola, T., Sampaio, V., & Gama, E. (2020). Gluteus Maximus 
Activation during Common Strength and Hypertrophy Exercises: A Systematic Review. Journal of 
Sports Science & Medicine, 19(1), 195–203. 
Neto, W., Vieira, T., & Gama, E. (2019). Barbell Hip Thrust, Muscular Activation and Performance: A 
Systematic Review. Journal of Sports Science & Medicine, 18(2), 198–206. 

212  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
Newham, D., Jones, D., Turner, D., & Mcintyre, D. (1995). The metabolic costs of different types of contractile 
activity of the human adductor pollicis muscle. Journal of Physiology, 488(3), 815–819. 
Newton, R., Kraemer, W., & Häkkinen, K. (1999). Effects of ballistic training on preseason preparation of elite 
volleyball players. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 31(2), 323–330. 
Newton, R. U., Kraemer, W. J., Hakkinen, K., Humphries, B. J., & Murphy, A. J. (1996). Kinematics, Kinetics, 
and Muscle Activation During Explosive Upper Body Movements. Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 
12(1), 31–43. 
Noorkõiv, M., Nosaka, K., & Blazevich, A. (2014). Neuromuscular adaptations associated with knee joint 
angle-specific force change. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 46(8), 1525–1537. 
Novacheck, T. F. (1998). The biomechanics of running. Gait & posture, 7(1), 77–95. 
Opar, D., Williams, M., & Shield, A. (2012). Hamstring strain injuries: factors that lead to injury and re-injury. 
Sports Medicine, 42(3), 209–226. 
Pandy, M. G., Lai, A. K., Schache, A. G., & Lin, Y. C. (2021). How muscles maximize performance in accelerated 
sprinting. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 31(10), 1882–1896. 
Pareja-Blanco, F., Sánchez-Medina, L., Suárez-Arrones, L., & González-Badillo, J. (2016). Effects of Velocity 
Loss During Resistance Training on Performance in Professional Soccer Players. International Journal 
of Sports Physiology and Performance, 12(4), 512–519. 
Pérez-Castilla, A., García-Ramos, A., Padial, P., Morales-Artacho, A., & Feriche, B. (2020). Load-Velocity 
Relationship in Variations of the Half-Squat Exercise: Influence of Execution Technique. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 34(4), 1024–1031. 
Potier, T. G., Alexander, C. M., & Seynnes, O. R. (2009). Effects of eccentric strength training on biceps femoris 
muscle architecture and knee joint range of movement. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 105(6), 
939–944. 
Proske, U., & Morgan, D. L. (2001). Muscle damage from eccentric exercise: mechanism, mechanical signs, 
adaptation and clinical applications. Journal of Physiology, 537(2), 333–345. 
Randell, A., Cronin, J., Keogh, J., Gill, N., & Pedersen, M. (2011). Effect of instantaneous performance feedback 
during 6 weeks of velocity-based resistance training on sport-specific performance tests. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 25(1), 87–93. 
Requena, B., González-Badillo, J., De Villareal, E., Ereline, J., García, I., Gapeyeva, H., & Pääsuke, M. (2009). 
Functional performance, maximal strength, and power characteristics in isometric and dynamic 
actions of lower extremities in soccer players. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 23(5), 1391–
1401. 
Ribeiro, J., Teixeira, L., Lemos, R., Teixeira, A., Moreira, V., Silva, P., & Nakamura, F. (2019). Effects of 
Plyometric Versus Optimum Power Load Training on Components of Physical Fitness in Young Male 
Soccer Players. International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 15(2), 222–230. 
Rio, E., Kidgell, D., Purdam, C., Gaida, J., Moseley, G., Pearce, A., & Cook, J. (2015). Isometric exercise induces 
analgesia and reduces inhibition in patellar tendinopathy. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 49(19), 
1277–1283. 
Rio, E., Van Ark, M., Docking, S., Moseley, G. L., Kidgell, D., Gaida, J. E., Van Den Akker-Scheek, I., Zwerver, 
J., & Cook, J. (2017). Isometric contractions are more analgesic than isotonic contractions for patellar 
tendon pain: an in-season randomized clinical trial. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 27(3), 253–259. 
Rivière, M., Louit, L., Strokosch, A., & Seitz, L. B. (2017). Variable resistance training promotes greater strength 
and power adaptations than traditional resistance training in elite youth rugby league players. Journal 
of Strength and Conditioning Research, 31(4), 947–955. 
Rodríguez-Perea, Á., Reyes-Ferrada, W., Jerez-Mayorga, D., Ríos, L. C., Van Den Tillar, R., Ríos, I. C., & 
Martínez-García, D. (2023). Core training and performance: a systematic review with meta-analysis. 
Biology of Sport, 40(4), 975–992. 
Roelker, S. A., Devita, P., Willson, J. D., & Neptune, R. R. (2022). Differences in muscle demand and joint 
contact forces between running and skipping. Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 38(6), 382–390. 
Saeterbakken, A., Andersen, V., Kolnes, M., & Fimland, M. (2014). Effects of replacing free weights with elastic 
band resistance in squats on trunk muscle activation. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 
28(11), 3056–3062. 

 by Irineu Loturco et al. 
213 
Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 
Saeterbakken, A., Andersen, V., & Van Den Tillaar, R. (2016). Comparison of Kinematics and Muscle 
Activation in Free-Weight Back Squat With and Without Elastic Bands. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, 30(4), 945–952. 
Saeterbakken, A. H., Stien, N., Andersen, V., Scott, S., Cumming, K. T., Behm, D. G., Granacher, U., & Prieske, 
O. (2022). The effects of trunk muscle training on physical fitness and sport-specific performance in 
young and adult athletes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Medicine, 52(7), 1599–1622. 
Schaefer, L. V., & Bittmann, F. N. (2017). Are there two forms of isometric muscle action? Results of the 
experimental study support a distinction between a holding and a pushing isometric muscle function. 
BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation, 9, 1–13. 
Signorile, J. F., Weber, B., Roll, B., Caruso, J. F., & Lowensteyn, I. (1994). An Electromyographical Comparison 
of the Squat. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 8(3), 178–183. 
Simenz, C., Dugan, C., & Ebben, W. (2005). Strength and conditioning practices of National Basketball 
Association strength and conditioning coaches. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 19(3), 495–
504. 
Śliwowski, R., Jadczak, Ł., Hejna, R., & Wieczorek, A. (2015). The effects of individualized resistance strength 
programs on knee muscular imbalances in junior elite soccer players. PloS One, 10(12), e0144021. 
Soria-Gila, M., Chirosa, I., Bautista, I., Baena, S., & Chirosa, L. (2015). Effects of Variable Resistance Training 
on Maximal Strength: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 29(11), 3260–3270. 
Stastny, P., Lehnert, M., Zaatar, A., Svoboda, Z., & Xaverova, Z. (2015). Does the Dumbbell-Carrying Position 
Change the Muscle Activity in Split Squats and Walking Lunges? Journal of Strength and Conditioning 
Research, 29(11), 3177–3187. 
Suchomel, T., Mckeever, S., & Comfort, P. (2020). Training With Weightlifting Derivatives: The Effects of Force 
and Velocity Overload Stimuli. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 34(7), 1808–1818. 
Suchomel, T. J., Comfort, P., & Stone, M. H. (2015). Weightlifting pulling derivatives: Rationale for 
implementation and application. Sports Medicine, 45(6), 823–839. 
Suchomel, T. J., Nimphius, S., Bellon, C. R., Hornsby, W. G., & Stone, M. H. (2021). Training for Muscular 
Strength: Methods for Monitoring and Adjusting Training Intensity. Sports Medicine, 51(10), 2051–
2066. 
Suchomel, T. J., Nimphius, S., Bellon, C. R., & Stone, M. H. (2018). The Importance of Muscular Strength: 
Training Considerations. Sports Medicine, 48(4), 765–785. 
Suchomel, T. J., Nimphius, S., & Stone, M. H. (2016). The Importance of Muscular Strength in Athletic 
Performance. Sports Medicine, 46(10), 1419–1449. 
Thapa, R. K., Lum, D., Moran, J., & Ramirez-Campillo, R. (2021). Effects of complex training on sprint, jump, 
and change of direction ability of soccer players: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 11, 627869. 
Tillaar, R., & Ettema, G. (2009). A comparison of successful and unsuccessful attempts in maximal bench 
pressing. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 41(11), 2056–2063. 
Timmins, R., Ruddy, J., Presland, J., Maniar, N., Shield, A., Williams, M., & Opar, D. (2016). Architectural 
Changes of the Biceps Femoris Long Head after Concentric or Eccentric Training. Medicine and Science 
in Sports and Exercise, 48(3), 499–508. 
Timmins, R. G., Filopoulos, D., Nguyen, V., Giannakis, J., Ruddy, J. D., Hickey, J. T., Maniar, N., & Opar, D. 
A. (2021). Sprinting, strength, and architectural adaptations following hamstring training in 
Australian footballers. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 31(6), 1276–1289. 
Tous-Fajardo, J., Gonzalo-Skok, O., Arjol-Serrano, J., & Tesch, P. (2015). Enhancing Change-of-Direction Speed 
in Soccer Players by Functional Inertial Eccentric Overload and Vibration Training. International 
Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 11(1), 66–73. 
Tous-Fajardo, J., Maldonado, R., Quintana, J., Pozzo, M., & Tesch, P. (2006). The flywheel leg-curl machine: 
offering eccentric overload for hamstring development. International Journal of Sports Physiology and 
Performance, 1(3), 293–298. 
Vesilind, P. (2006). Peace Engineering. Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice, 132(4), 
283–287. 

214  
Resistance training practices of brazilian olympic sprint and jump coaches 
Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 90/2024 
http://www.johk.pl 
Weldon, A., Duncan, M. J., Turner, A., Christie, C. J., & Pang, C. M. (2021a). Contemporary practices of strength 
and conditioning coaches in professional cricket. International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching, 16(3), 
585–600. 
Weldon, A., Duncan, M. J., Turner, A., Laplaca, D., Sampaio, J., & Christie, C. J. (2022). Practices of strength 
and conditioning coaches: a snapshot from different sports, countries, and expertise levels. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 36(5), 1335–1344. 
Weldon, A., Duncan, M. J., Turner, A., Lockie, R. G., & Loturco, I. (2021b). Practices of strength and 
conditioning coaches in professional sports: a systematic review. Biology of Sport, 39(3), 715–726. 
Weldon, A., Duncan, M. J., Turner, A., Sampaio, J., Noon, M., Wong, D., & Lai, V. W. (2021c). Contemporary 
practices of strength and conditioning coaches in professional soccer. Biology of Sport, 38(3), 377–390. 
Weyand, P., Sternlight, D., Bellizzi, M., & Wright, S. (2000). Faster top running speeds are achieved with 
greater ground forces not more rapid leg movements. Journal of Applied Physiology, 89(5), 1991–1999. 
Williams, M., Gibson, N., Sorbie, G., Ugbolue, U., Brouner, J., & Easton, C. (2021). Activation of the Gluteus 
Maximus During Performance of the Back Squat, Split Squat, and Barbell Hip Thrust and the 
Relationship With Maximal Sprinting. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 35(1), 16–24. 
Wilson, G. J., Newton, R. U., Murphy, A. J., & Humphries, B. J. (1993). The optimal training load for the 
development of dynamic athletic performance. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 25(11), 1279–
1286. 
Wisløff, U., Castagna, C., Helgerud, J., Jones, R., & Hoff, J. (2004). Strong correlation of maximal squat strength 
with sprint performance and vertical jump height in elite soccer players. British Journal of Sports 
Medicine, 38(3), 285–288. 
Wright, G. A., Delong, T. H., & Gehlsen, G. (1999). Electromyographic activity of the hamstrings during 
performance of the leg curl, stiff-leg deadlift, and back squat movements. Journal of Strength & 
Conditioning Research, 13(2), 168–174. 
Yavuz, H., Erdağ, D., Amca, A., & Aritan, S. (2015). Kinematic and EMG activities during front and back squat 
variations in maximum loads. Journal of Sports Sciences, 33(10), 1058–1066. 
Yeung, S., Suen, A., & Yeung, E. (2009). A prospective cohort study of hamstring injuries in competitive 
sprinters: preseason muscle imbalance as a possible risk factor. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 43(8), 
589–594. 
Young, M., & Choice, C. (2007). Maximal velocity sprint mechanics. Track Coach, 179, 5723–5729. 
Young, W., Mclean, B., & Ardagna, J. (1995). Relationship between strength qualities and sprinting 
performance. Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness, 35(1), 13–19. 
Vallance, S. R. (2017). The Relationship Between Maximal Strength and Performance Measures: A Correlational Study. 
University 
of 
Stirling 
(Thesis). 
https://www.storre.stir.ac.uk/bitstream/1893/28082/1/Thesis%20Amendments.pdf (accessed on 12 
December 2023) 
Zabaloy, S., Freitas, T. T., Pareja-Blanco, F., Alcaraz, P. E., & Loturco, I. (2023). Narrative Review on the Use of 
Sled Training to Improve Sprint Performance in Team Sport Athletes. Strength & Conditioning Journal, 
45(1), 13–28. 
Zabaloy, S., Giráldez, J., Fink, B., Alcaraz, P. E., Pereira, L. A., Freitas, T. T., & Loturco, I. (2022a). Strength 
deficit in elite young rugby players: Differences between playing positions and associations with 
sprint and jump performance. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 36(4), 920–926. 
Zabaloy, S., Tondelli, E., Pereira, L. A., Freitas, T. T., & Loturco, I. (2022b). Training and testing practices of 
strength and conditioning coaches in Argentinian Rugby Union. International Journal of Sports Science 
& Coaching, 17(6), 1331–1344. 
Zhang, X., Feng, S., Peng, R., & Li, H. (2022). The Role of Velocity-Based Training (VBT) in Enhancing Athletic 
Performance in Trained Individuals: A Meta-Analysis of Controlled Trials. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(15), 9252.  
